
The Second Book of Esdras

   {1:1} The second book of the prophet Esdras, the son of Saraias, the
son of Azarias, the son of Helchias, the son of Sadamias, the sou of
Sadoc, the son of Achitob,

   {1:2} The son of Achias, the son of Phinees, the son of Heli, the
son of Amarias, the son of Aziei, the son of Marimoth, the son of And
he spake unto the of Borith, the son of Abisei, the son of Phinees, the
son of Eleazar,

   {1:3} The son of Aaron, of the tribe of Levi; which was captive in
the land of the Medes, in the reign of Artexerxes king of the Persians.

   {1:4} And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

   {1:5} Go thy way, and shew my people their sinful deeds, and their
children their wickedness which they have done against me; that they
may tell their children's children:

   {1:6} Because the sins of their fathers are increased in them: for
they have forgotten me, and have offered unto strange gods.

   {1:7} Am not I even he that brought them out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage? but they have provoked me unto wrath, and
despised my counsels.

   {1:8} Pull thou off then the hair of thy head, and cast all evil
upon them, for they have not been obedient unto my law, but it is a
rebellious people.

   {1:9} How long shall I forbear them, into whom I have done so much
good?

   {1:10} Many kings have I destroyed for their sakes; Pharaoh with his
servants and all his power have I smitten down.

   {1:11} All the nations have I destroyed before them, and in the east
I have scattered the people of two provinces, even of Tyrus and Sidon,
and have slain all their enemies.

   {1:12} Speak thou therefore unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord,

   {1:13} I led you through the sea and in the beginning gave you  a
large and safe passage; I gave you Moses for a leader,  and Aaron for a
priest.

   {1:14} I gave you light in a pillar of fire, and great wonders have
I done among you; yet have ye forgotten me, saith the Lord.

   {1:15} Thus saith the Almighty Lord, The quails were as a token to
you;  I gave you tents for your safeguard: nevertheless ye murmured
there,

   {1:16} And triumphed not in my name for the destruction of your
enemies,  but ever to this day do ye yet murmur.

   {1:17} Where are the benefits that I have done for you? when ye were
hungry and thirsty in the wilderness, did ye not cry unto me,

   {1:18} Saying, Why hast thou brought us into this wilderness to kill
us?  it had been better for us to have served the Egyptians,  than to
die in this wilderness.

   {1:19} Then had I pity upon your mournings, and gave you manna to
eat;  so ye did eat angels' bread.

   {1:20} When ye were thirsty, did I not cleave the rock, and waters
flowed out to your fill? for the heat I covered you with the leaves of
the trees.

   {1:21} I divided among you a fruitful land, I cast out the
Canaanites, the Pherezites, and the Philistines, before you: what shall
I yet do more for you? saith the Lord.

   {1:22} Thus saith the Almighty Lord, When ye were in the wilderness,
in the river of the Amorites, being athirst, and blaspheming my name,

   {1:23} I gave you not fire for your blasphemies, but cast a tree in
the water, and made the river sweet.

   {1:24} What shall I do unto thee, O Jacob? thou, Juda, wouldest not
obey me: I will turn me to other nations, and unto those will  I give
my name, that they may keep my statutes.

   {1:25} Seeing ye have forsaken me, I will forsake you also; when ye
desire me to be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy upon you.

   {1:26} Whensoever ye shall call upon me, I will not hear you:  for
ye have defiled your hands with blood, and your feet are swift  to
commit manslaughter.

   {1:27} Ye have not as it were forsaken me, but your own selves,
saith the Lord.

   {1:28} Thus saith the Almighty Lord, Have I not prayed you as a
father his sons, as a mother her daughters, and a nurse her young babes,

   {1:29} That ye would be my people, and I should be your God; that ye
would be my children, and I should be your father?

   {1:30} I gathered you together, as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings: but now, what shall I do unto you? I will cast you out
from my face.

   {1:31} When ye offer unto me, I will turn my face from you: for your
solemn feastdays, your new moons, and your circumcisions, have I
forsaken.

   {1:32} I sent unto you my servants the prophets, whom ye have taken
and slain, and torn their bodies in pieces, whose blood I will require
of your hands, saith the Lord.

   {1:33} Thus saith the Almighty Lord, Your house is desolate, I will
cast you out as the wind doth stubble.

   {1:34} And your children shall not be fruitful; for they have
despised my commandment, and done the thing that is an evil before me.

   {1:35} Your houses will I give to a people that shall come; which
not having heard of me yet shall believe me; to whom I have shewed no
signs, yet they shall do that I have commanded them.

   {1:36} They have seen no prophets, yet they shall call their sins to
remembrance, and acknowledge them.

   {1:37} I take to witness the grace of the people to come, whose
little ones rejoice in gladness: and though they have not seen me with
bodily eyes, yet in spirit they believe the thing that I say.

   {1:38} And now, brother, behold what glory; and see the people that
come from the east:

   {1:39} Unto whom I will give for leaders, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, Joel, Abdias, and Jonas,

   {1:40} Nahum, and Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zachary, and Malachy,
which is called also an angel of the Lord.

   {2:1} Thus saith the Lord, I brought this people out of bondage, and
I gave them my commandments by menservants the prophets; whom they
would not hear, but despised my counsels.

   {2:2} The mother that bare them saith unto them, Go your way, ye
children; for I am a widow and forsaken.

   {2:3} I brought you up with gladness; but with sorrow and heaviness
have I lost you: for ye have sinned before the Lord your God, and done
that thing that is evil before him.

   {2:4} But what shall I now do unto you? I am a widow and forsaken:
go your way, O my children, and ask mercy of the Lord.

   {2:5} As for me, O father, I call upon thee for a witness over the
mother of these children, which would not keep my covenant,

   {2:6} That thou bring them to confusion, and their mother to a
spoil, that there may be no offspring of them.

   {2:7} Let them be scattered abroad among the heathen, let their
names be put out of the earth: for they have despised my covenant.

   {2:8} Woe be unto thee, Assur, thou that hidest the unrighteous in
thee! O thou wicked people, remember what I did unto Sodom and Gomorrha;

   {2:9} Whose land lieth in clods of pitch and heaps of ashes: even so
also will I do unto them that hear me not, saith the Almighty Lord.

   {2:10} Thus saith the Lord unto Esdras, Tell my people that I will
give them the kingdom of Jerusalem, which I would have given unto
Israel.

   {2:11} Their glory also will I take unto me, and give these the
everlasting tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.

   {2:12} They shall have the tree of life for an ointment of sweet
savour; they shall neither labour, nor be weary.

   {2:13} Go, and ye shall receive: pray for few days unto you, that
they may be shortened: the kingdom is already prepared for you: watch.

   {2:14} Take heaven and earth to witness; for I have broken the evil
in pieces, and created the good: for I live, saith the Lord.

   {2:15} Mother, embrace thy children, and bring them up with
gladness, make their feet as fast as a pillar: for I have chosen thee,
saith the Lord.

   {2:16} And those that be dead will I raise up again from their
places, and bring them out of the graves: for I have known my name in
Israel.

   {2:17} Fear not, thou mother of the children: for I have chosen
thee, saith the Lord.

   {2:18} For thy help will I send my servants Esau and Jeremy, after
whose counsel I have sanctified and prepared for thee twelve trees
laden with divers fruits,

   {2:19} And as many fountains flowing with milk and honey, and seven
mighty mountains, whereupon there grow roses and lilies, whereby I will
fill thy children with joy.

   {2:20} Do right to the widow, judge for the fatherless, give to the
poor, defend the orphan, clothe the naked,

   {2:21} Heal the broken and the weak, laugh not a lame man to scorn,
defend the maimed, and let the blind man come into the sight of my
clearness.

   {2:22} Keep the old and young within thy walls.

   {2:23} Wheresoever thou findest the dead, take them and bury them,
and I will give thee the first place in my resurrection.

   {2:24} Abide still, O my people, and take thy rest, for thy
quietness still come.

   {2:25} Nourish thy children, O thou good nurse; stablish their feet.

   {2:26} As for the servants whom I have given thee, there shall not
one of them perish; for I will require them from among thy number.

   {2:27} Be not weary: for when the day of trouble and heaviness
cometh, others shall weep and be sorrowful, but thou shalt be merry and
have abundance.

   {2:28} The heathen shall envy thee, but they shall be able to do
nothing against thee, saith the Lord.

   {2:29} My hands shall cover thee, so that thy children shall not see
hell.

   {2:30} Be joyful, O thou mother, with thy children; for I will
deliver thee, saith the Lord.

   {2:31} Remember thy children that sleep, for I shall bring them out
of the sides of the earth, and shew mercy unto them: for I am merciful,
saith the Lord Almighty.

   {2:32} Embrace thy children until I come and shew mercy unto them:
for my wells run over, and my grace shall not fail.

   {2:33} I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the mount Oreb,
that I should go unto Israel; but when I came unto them, they set me at
nought, and despised the commandment of the Lord.

   {2:34} And therefore I say unto you, O ye heathen, that hear and
understand, look for your Shepherd, he shall give you everlasting rest;
for he is nigh at hand, that shall come in the end of the world.

   {2:35} Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting
light shall shine upon you for evermore.

   {2:36} Flee the shadow of this world, receive the joyfulness of your
glory: I testify my Saviour openly.

   {2:37} O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, giving
thanks unto him that hath led you to the heavenly kingdom.

   {2:38} Arise up and stand, behold the number of those that be sealed
in the feast of the Lord;

   {2:39} Which are departed from the shadow of the world, and have
received glorious garments of the Lord.

   {2:40} Take thy number, O Sion, and shut up those of thine that are
clothed in white, which have fulfilled the law of the Lord.

   {2:41} The number of thy children, whom thou longedst for, is
fulfilled: beseech the power of the Lord, that thy people, which have
been called from the beginning, may be hallowed.

   {2:42} I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great people, whom I could
not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs.

   {2:43} And in the midst of them there was a young man of a high
stature, taller than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads he
set crowns, and was more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly.

   {2:44} So I asked the angel, and said, Sir, what are these?

   {2:45} He answered and said unto me, These be they that have put off
the mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have confessed the
name of God: now are they crowned, and receive palms.

   {2:46} Then said I unto the angel, What young person is it that
crowneth them, and giveth them palms in their hands?

   {2:47} So he answered and said unto me, It is the Son of God, whom
they have confessed in the world. Then began I greatly to commend them
that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord.

   {2:48} Then the angel said unto me, Go thy way, and tell my people
what manner of things, and how great wonders of the Lord thy God, thou
hast seen.

   {3:1} In the thirtieth year after the ruin of the city I was in
Babylon, and lay troubled upon my bed, and my thoughts came up over my
heart:

   {3:2} For I saw the desolation of Sion, and the wealth of them that
dwelt at Babylon.

   {3:3} And my spirit was sore moved, so that I began to speak words
full of fear to the most High, and said,

   {3:4} O Lord, who bearest rule, thou spakest at the beginning, when
thou didst plant the earth, and that thyself alone, and commandedst the
people,

   {3:5} And gavest a body unto Adam without soul, which was the
workmanship of thine hands, and didst breathe into him the breath of
life, and he was made living before thee.

   {3:6} And thou leadest him into paradise, which thy right hand had
planted, before ever the earth came forward.

   {3:7} And unto him thou gavest commandment to love thy way: which he
transgressed, and immediately thou appointedst death in him and in his
generations, of whom came nations, tribes, people, and kindreds, out of
number.

   {3:8} And every people walked after their own will, and did
wonderful things before thee, and despised thy commandments.

   {3:9} And again in process of time thou broughtest the flood upon
those that dwelt in the world, and destroyedst them.

   {3:10} And it came to pass in every of them, that as death was to
Adam, so was the flood to these.

   {3:11} Nevertheless one of them thou leftest, namely, Noah with his
household, of whom came all righteous men.

   {3:12} And it happened, that when they that dwelt upon the earth
began to multiply, and had gotten them many children, and were a great
people, they began again to be more ungodly than the first.

   {3:13} Now when they lived so wickedly before thee, thou didst
choose thee a man from among them, whose name was Abraham.

   {3:14} Him thou lovedst, and unto him only thou shewedst thy will:

   {3:15} And madest an everlasting covenant with him, promising him
that thou wouldest never forsake his seed.

   {3:16} And unto him thou gavest Isaac, and unto Isaac also thou
gavest Jacob and Esau. As for Jacob, thou didst choose him to thee, and
put by Esau: and so Jacob became a great multitude.

   {3:17} And it came to pass, that when thou leadest his seed out of
Egypt, thou broughtest them up to the mount Sinai.

   {3:18} And bowing the heavens, thou didst set fast the earth,
movedst the whole world, and madest the depths to tremble, and
troubledst the men of that age.

   {3:19} And thy glory went through four gates, of fire, and of
earthquake, and of wind, and of cold; that thou mightest give the law
unto the seed of Jacob, and diligence unto the generation of Israel.

   {3:20} And yet tookest thou not away from them a wicked heart, that
thy law might bring forth fruit in them.

   {3:21} For the first Adam bearing a wicked heart transgressed, and
was overcome; and so be all they that are born of him.

   {3:22} Thus infirmity was made permanent; and the law (also) in the
heart of the people with the malignity of the root; so that the good
departed away, and the evil abode still.

   {3:23} So the times passed away, and the years were brought to an
end: then didst thou raise thee up a servant, called David:

   {3:24} Whom thou commandedst to build a city unto thy name, and to
offer incense and oblations unto thee therein.

   {3:25} When this was done many years, then they that inhabited the
city forsook thee,

   {3:26} And in all things did even as Adam and all his generations
had done: for they also had a wicked heart:

   {3:27} And so thou gavest thy city over into the hands of thine
enemies.

   {3:28} Are their deeds then any better that inhabit Babylon, that
they should therefore have the dominion over Sion?

   {3:29} For when I came thither, and had seen impieties without
number, then my soul saw many evildoers in this thirtieth year, so that
my heart failed me.

   {3:30} For I have seen how thou sufferest them sinning, and hast
spared wicked doers: and hast destroyed thy people, and hast preserved
thine enemies, and hast not signified it.

   {3:31} I do not remember how this way may be left: Are they then of
Babylon better than they of Sion?

   {3:32} Or is there any other people that knoweth thee beside Israel?
or what generation hath so believed thy covenants as Jacob?

   {3:33} And yet their reward appeareth not, and their labour hath no
fruit: for I have gone here and there through the heathen, and I see
that they flow in wealth, and think not upon thy commandments.

   {3:34} Weigh thou therefore our wickedness now in the balance, and
their's also that dwell the world; and so shall thy name no where be
found but in Israel.

   {3:35} Or when was it that they which dwell upon the earth have not
sinned in thy sight? or what people have so kept thy commandments?

   {3:36} Thou shalt find that Israel by name hath kept thy precepts;
but not the heathen.

   {4:1} And the angel that was sent unto me, whose name was Uriel,
gave me an answer,

   {4:2} And said, Thy heart hath gone to far in this world, and
thinkest thou to comprehend the way of the most High?

   {4:3} Then said I, Yea, my lord. And he answered me, and said, I am
sent to shew thee three ways, and to set forth three similitudes before
thee:

   {4:4} Whereof if thou canst declare me one, I will shew thee also
the way that thou desirest to see, and I shall shew thee from whence
the wicked heart cometh.

   {4:5} And I said, Tell on, my lord. Then said he unto me, Go thy
way, weigh me the weight of the fire, or measure me the blast of the
wind, or call me again the day that is past.

   {4:6} Then answered I and said, What man is able to do that, that
thou shouldest ask such things of me?

   {4:7} And he said unto me, If I should ask thee how great dwellings
are in the midst of the sea, or how many springs are in the beginning
of the deep, or how many springs are above the firmament, or which are
the outgoings of paradise:

   {4:8} Peradventure thou wouldest say unto me, I never went down into
the deep, nor as yet into hell, neither did I ever climb up into heaven.

   {4:9} Nevertheless now have I asked thee but only of the fire and
wind, and of the day wherethrough thou hast passed, and of things from
which thou canst not be separated, and yet canst thou give me no answer
of them.

   {4:10} He said moreover unto me, Thine own things, and such as are
grown up with thee, canst thou not know;

   {4:11} How should thy vessel then be able to comprehend the way of
the Highest, and, the world being now outwardly corrupted to understand
the corruption that is evident in my sight?

   {4:12} Then said I unto him, It were better that we were not at all,
than that we should live still in wickedness, and to suffer, and not to
know wherefore.

   {4:13} He answered me, and said, I went into a forest into a plain,
and the trees took counsel,

   {4:14} And said, Come, let us go and make war against the sea that
it may depart away before us, and that we may make us more woods.

   {4:15} The floods of the sea also in like manner took counsel, and
said, Come, let us go up and subdue the woods of the plain, that there
also we may make us another country.

   {4:16} The thought of the wood was in vain, for the fire came and
consumed it.

   {4:17} The thought of the floods of the sea came likewise to nought,
for the sand stood up and stopped them.

   {4:18} If thou wert judge now betwixt these two, whom wouldest thou
begin to justify? or whom wouldest thou condemn?

   {4:19} I answered and said, Verily it is a foolish thought that they
both have devised, for the ground is given unto the wood, and the sea
also hath his place to bear his floods.

   {4:20} Then answered he me, and said, Thou hast given a right
judgment, but why judgest thou not thyself also?

   {4:21} For like as the ground is given unto the wood, and the sea to
his floods: even so they that dwell upon the earth may understand
nothing but that which is upon the earth: and he that dwelleth above
the heavens may only understand the things that are above the height of
the heavens.

   {4:22} Then answered I and said, I beseech thee, O Lord, let me have
understanding:

   {4:23} For it was not my mind to be curious of the high things, but
of such as pass by us daily, namely, wherefore Israel is given up as a
reproach to the heathen, and for what cause the people whom thou hast
loved is given over unto ungodly nations, and why the law of our
forefathers is brought to nought, and the written covenants come to
none effect,

   {4:24} And we pass away out of the world as grasshoppers, and our
life is astonishment and fear, and we are not worthy to obtain mercy.

   {4:25} What will he then do unto his name whereby we are called? of
these things have I asked.

   {4:26} Then answered he me, and said, The more thou searchest, the
more thou shalt marvel; for the world hasteth fast to pass away,

   {4:27} And cannot comprehend the things that are promised to the
righteous in time to come: for this world is full of unrighteousness
and infirmities.

   {4:28} But as concerning the things whereof thou askest me, I will
tell thee; for the evil is sown, but the destruction thereof is not yet
come.

   {4:29} If therefore that which is sown be not turned upside down,
and if the place where the evil is sown pass not away, then cannot it
come that is sown with good.

   {4:30} For the grain of evil seed hath been sown in the heart of
Adam from the beginning, and how much ungodliness hath it brought up
unto this time? and how much shall it yet bring forth until the time of
threshing come?

   {4:31} Ponder now by thyself, how great fruit of wickedness the
grain of evil seed hath brought forth.

   {4:32} And when the ears shall be cut down, which are without
number, how great a floor shall they fill?

   {4:33} Then I answered and said, How, and when shall these things
come to pass? wherefore are our years few and evil?

   {4:34} And he answered me, saying, Do not thou hasten above the most
Highest: for thy haste is in vain to be above him, for thou hast much
exceeded.

   {4:35} Did not the souls also of the righteous ask question of these
things in their chambers, saying, How long shall I hope on this
fashion? when cometh the fruit of the floor of our reward?

   {4:36} And unto these things Uriel the archangel gave them answer,
and said, Even when the number of seeds is filled in you: for he hath
weighed the world in the balance.

   {4:37} By measure hath he measured the times; and by number hath he
numbered the times; and he doth not move nor stir them, until the said
measure be fulfilled.

   {4:38} Then answered I and said, O Lord that bearest rule, even we
all are full of impiety.

   {4:39} And for our sakes peradventure it is that the floors of the
righteous are not filled, because of the sins of them that dwell upon
the earth.

   {4:40} So he answered me, and said, Go thy way to a woman with
child, and ask of her when she hath fulfilled her nine months, if her
womb may keep the birth any longer within her.

   {4:41} Then said I, No, Lord, that can she not. And he said unto me,
In the grave the chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman:

   {4:42} For like as a woman that travaileth maketh haste to escape
the necessity of the travail: even so do these places haste to deliver
those things that are committed unto them.

   {4:43} From the beginning, look, what thou desirest to see, it shall
be shewed thee.

   {4:44} Then answered I and said, If I have found favour in thy
sight, and if it be possible, and if I be meet therefore,

   {4:45} Shew me then whether there be more to come than is past, or
more past than is to come.

   {4:46} What is past I know, but what is for to come I know not.

   {4:47} And he said unto me, Stand up upon the right side, and I
shall expound the similitude unto thee.

   {4:48} So I stood, and saw, and, behold, an hot burning oven passed
by before me: and it happened that when the flame was gone by I looked,
and, behold, the smoke remained still.

   {4:49} After this there passed by before me a watery cloud, and sent
down much rain with a storm; and when the stormy rain was past, the
drops remained still.

   {4:50} Then said he unto me, Consider with thyself; as the rain is
more than the drops, and as the fire is greater than the smoke; but the
drops and the smoke remain behind: so the quantity which is past did
more exceed.

   {4:51} Then I prayed, and said, May I live, thinkest thou, until
that time? or what shall happen in those days?

   {4:52} He answered me, and said, As for the tokens whereof thou
askest me, I may tell thee of them in part: but as touching thy life, I
am not sent to shew thee; for I do not know it.

   {5:1} Nevertheless as coming the tokens, behold, the days shall
come, that they which dwell upon earth shall be taken in a great
number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and the land shall be
barren of faith.

   {5:2} But iniquity shall be increased above that which now thou
seest, or that thou hast heard long ago.

   {5:3} And the land, that thou seest now to have root, shalt thou see
wasted suddenly.

   {5:4} But if the most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see after
the third trumpet that the sun shall suddenly shine again in the night,
and the moon thrice in the day:

   {5:5} And blood shall drop out of wood, and the stone shall give his
voice, and the people shall be troubled:

   {5:6} And even he shall rule, whom they look not for that dwell upon
the earth, and the fowls shall take their flight away together:

   {5:7} And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise
in the night, which many have not known: but they shall all hear the
voice thereof.

   {5:8} There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire
shall be oft sent out again, and the wild beasts shall change their
places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters:

   {5:9} And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and all friends
shall destroy one another; then shall wit hide itself, and
understanding withdraw itself into his secret chamber,

   {5:10} And shall be sought of many, and yet not be found: then shall
unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplied upon earth.

   {5:11} One land also shall ask another, and say, Is righteousness
that maketh a man righteous gone through thee? And it shall say, No.

   {5:12} At the same time shall men hope, but nothing obtain: they
shall labour, but their ways shall not prosper.

   {5:13} To shew thee such tokens I have leave; and if thou wilt pray
again, and weep as now, and fast even days, thou shalt hear yet greater
things.

   {5:14} Then I awaked, and an extreme fearfulness went through all my
body, and my mind was troubled, so that it fainted.

   {5:15} So the angel that was come to talk with me held me, comforted
me, and set me up upon my feet.

   {5:16} And in the second night it came to pass, that Salathiel the
captain of the people came unto me, saying, Where hast thou been? and
why is thy countenance so heavy?

   {5:17} Knowest thou not that Israel is committed unto thee in the
land of their captivity?

   {5:18} Up then, and eat bread, and forsake us not, as the shepherd
that leaveth his flock in the hands of cruel wolves.

   {5:19} Then said I unto him, Go thy ways from me, and come not nigh
me. And he heard what I said, and went from me.

   {5:20} And so I fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, like as
Uriel the angel commanded me.

   {5:21} And after seven days so it was, that the thoughts of my heart
were very grievous unto me again,

   {5:22} And my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I
began to talk with the most High again,

   {5:23} And said, O Lord that bearest rule, of every wood of the
earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou hast chosen thee one only
vine:

   {5:24} And of all lands of the whole world thou hast chosen thee one
pit: and of all the flowers thereof one lily:

   {5:25} And of all the depths of the sea thou hast filled thee one
river: and of all builded cities thou hast hallowed Sion unto thyself:

   {5:26} And of all the fowls that are created thou hast named thee
one dove: and of all the cattle that are made thou hast provided thee
one sheep:

   {5:27} And among all the multitudes of people thou hast gotten thee
one people: and unto this people, whom thou lovedst, thou gavest a law
that is approved of all.

   {5:28} And now, O Lord, why hast thou given this one people over
unto many? and upon the one root hast thou prepared others, and why
hast thou scattered thy only one people among many?

   {5:29} And they which did gainsay thy promises, and believed not thy
covenants, have trodden them down.

   {5:30} If thou didst so much hate thy people, yet shouldest thou
punish them with thine own hands.

   {5:31} Now when I had spoken these words, the angel that came to me
the night afore was sent unto me,

   {5:32} And said unto me, Hear me, and I will instruct thee; hearken
to the thing that I say, and I shall tell thee more.

   {5:33} And I said, Speak on, my Lord. Then said he unto me, Thou art
sore troubled in mind for Israel's sake: lovest thou that people better
than he that made them?

   {5:34} And I said, No, Lord: but of very grief have I spoken: for my
reins pain me every hour, while I labour to comprehend the way of the
most High, and to seek out part of his judgment.

   {5:35} And he said unto me, Thou canst not. And I said, Wherefore,
Lord? whereunto was I born then? or why was not my mother's womb then
my grave, that I might not have seen the travail of Jacob, and the
wearisome toil of the stock of Israel?

   {5:36} And he said unto me, Number me the things that are not yet
come, gather me together the dross that are scattered abroad, make me
the flowers green again that are withered,

   {5:37} Open me the places that are closed, and bring me forth the
winds that in them are shut up, shew me the image of a voice: and then
I will declare to thee the thing that thou labourest to know.

   {5:38} And I said, O Lord that bearest rule, who may know these
things, but he that hath not his dwelling with men?

   {5:39} As for me, I am unwise: how may I then speak of these things
whereof thou askest me?

   {5:40} Then said he unto me, Like as thou canst do none of these
things that I have spoken of, even so canst thou not find out my
judgment, or in the end the love that I have promised unto my people.

   {5:41} And I said, Behold, O Lord, yet art thou nigh unto them that
be reserved till the end: and what shall they do that have been before
me, or we that be now, or they that shall come after us?

   {5:42} And he said unto me, I will liken my judgment unto a ring:
like as there is no slackness of the last, even so there is no
swiftness of the first.

   {5:43} So I answered and said, Couldest thou not make those that
have been made, and be now, and that are for to come, at once; that
thou mightest shew thy judgment the sooner?

   {5:44} Then answered he me, and said, The creature may not haste
above the maker; neither may the world hold them at once that shall be
created therein.

   {5:45} And I said, As thou hast said unto thy servant, that thou,
which givest life to all, hast given life at once to the creature that
thou hast created, and the creature bare it: even so it might now also
bear them that now be present at once.

   {5:46} And he said unto me, Ask the womb of a woman, and say unto
her, If thou bringest forth children, why dost thou it not together,
but one after another? pray her therefore to bring forth ten children
at once.

   {5:47} And I said, She cannot: but must do it by distance of time.

   {5:48} Then said he unto me, Even so have I given the womb of the
earth to those that be sown in it in their times.

   {5:49} For like as a young child may not bring forth the things that
belong to the aged, even so have I disposed the world which I created.

   {5:50} And I asked, and said, Seeing thou hast now given me the way,
I will proceed to speak before thee: for our mother, of whom thou hast
told me that she is young, draweth now nigh unto age.

   {5:51} He answered me, and said, Ask a woman that beareth children,
and she shall tell thee.

   {5:52} Say unto her, Wherefore are unto they whom thou hast now
brought forth like those that were before, but less of stature?

   {5:53} And she shall answer thee, They that be born in the the
strength of youth are of one fashion, and they that are born in the
time of age, when the womb faileth, are otherwise.

   {5:54} Consider thou therefore also, how that ye are less of stature
than those that were before you.

   {5:55} And so are they that come after you less than ye, as the
creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength
of youth.

   {5:56} Then said I, Lord, I beseech thee, if I have found favour in
thy sight, shew thy servant by whom thou visitest thy creature.

   {6:1} And he said unto me, In the beginning, when the earth was
made, before the borders of the world stood, or ever the winds blew,

   {6:2} Before it thundered and lightened, or ever the foundations of
paradise were laid,

   {6:3} Before the fair flowers were seen, or ever the moveable powers
were established, before the innumerable multitude of angels were
gathered together,

   {6:4} Or ever the heights of the air were lifted up, before the
measures of the firmament were named, or ever the chimneys in Sion were
hot,

   {6:5} And ere the present years were sought out, and or ever the
inventions of them that now sin were turned, before they were sealed
that have gathered faith for a treasure:

   {6:6} Then did I consider these things, and they all were made
through me alone, and through none other: by me also they shall be
ended, and by none other.

   {6:7} Then answered I and said, What shall be the parting asunder of
the times? or when shall be the end of the first, and the beginning of
it that followeth?

   {6:8} And he said unto me, From Abraham unto Isaac, when Jacob and
Esau were born of him, Jacob's hand held first the heel of Esau.

   {6:9} For Esau is the end of the world, and Jacob is the beginning
of it that followeth.

   {6:10} The hand of man is betwixt the heel and the hand: other
question, Esdras, ask thou not.

   {6:11} I answered then and said, O Lord that bearest rule, if I have
found favour in thy sight,

   {6:12} I beseech thee, shew thy servant the end of thy tokens,
whereof thou shewedst me part the last night.

   {6:13} So he answered and said unto me, Stand up upon thy feet, and
hear a mighty sounding voice.

   {6:14} And it shall be as it were a great motion; but the place
where thou standest shall not be moved.

   {6:15} And therefore when it speaketh be not afraid: for the word is
of the end, and the foundation of the earth is understood.

   {6:16} And why? because the speech of these things trembleth and is
moved: for it knoweth that the end of these things must be changed.

   {6:17} And it happened, that when I had heard it I stood up upon my
feet, and hearkened, and, behold, there was a voice that spake, and the
sound of it was like the sound of many waters.

   {6:18} And it said, Behold, the days come, that I will begin to draw
nigh, and to visit them that dwell upon the earth,

   {6:19} And will begin to make inquisition of them, what they be that
have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and when the affliction
of Sion shall be fulfilled;

   {6:20} And when the world, that shall begin to vanish away, shall be
finished, then will I shew these tokens: the books shall be opened
before the firmament, and they shall see all together:

   {6:21} And the children of a year old shall speak with their voices,
the women with child shall bring forth untimely children of three or
four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up.

   {6:22} And suddenly shall the sown places appear unsown, the full
storehouses shall suddenly be found empty:

   {6:23} And tha trumpet shall give a sound, which when every man
heareth, they shall be suddenly afraid.

   {6:24} At that time shall friends fight one against another like
enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those that dwell
therein, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in three
hours they shall not run.

   {6:25} Whosoever remaineth from all these that I have told thee
shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world.

   {6:26} And the men that are received shall see it, who have not
tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants shall
be changed, and turned into another meaning.

   {6:27} For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched.

   {6:28} As for faith, it shall flourish, corruption shall be
overcome, and the truth, which hath been so long without fruit, shall
be declared.

   {6:29} And when he talked with me, behold, I looked by little and
little upon him before whom I stood.

   {6:30} And these words said he unto me; I am come to shew thee the
time of the night to come.

   {6:31} If thou wilt pray yet more, and fast seven days again, I
shall tell thee greater things by day than I have heard.

   {6:32} For thy voice is heard before the most High: for the Mighty
hath seen thy righteous dealing, he hath seen also thy chastity, which
thou hast had ever since thy youth.

   {6:33} And therefore hath he sent me to shew thee all these things,
and to say unto thee, Be of good comfort and fear not

   {6:34} And hasten not with the times that are past, to think vain
things, that thou mayest not hasten from the latter times.

   {6:35} And it came to pass after this, that I wept again, and fasted
seven days in like manner, that I might fulfil the three weeks which he
told me.

   {6:36} And in the eighth night was my heart vexed within me again,
and I began to speak before the most High.

   {6:37} For my spirit was greatly set on fire, and my soul was in
distress.

   {6:38} And I said, O Lord, thou spakest from the beginning of the
creation, even the first day, and saidst thus; Let heaven and earth be
made; and thy word was a perfect work.

   {6:39} And then was the spirit, and darkness and silence were on
every side; the sound of man's voice was not yet formed.

   {6:40} Then commandedst thou a fair light to come forth of thy
treasures, that thy work might appear.

   {6:41} Upon the second day thou madest the spirit of the firmament,
and commandedst it to part asunder, and to make a division betwixt the
waters, that the one part might go up, and the other remain beneath.

   {6:42} Upon the third day thou didst command that the waters should
be gathered in the seventh part of the earth: six pats hast thou dried
up, and kept them, to the intent that of these some being planted of
God and tilled might serve thee.

   {6:43} For as soon as thy word went forth the work was made.

   {6:44} For immediately there was great and innumerable fruit, and
many and divers pleasures for the taste, and flowers of unchangeable
colour, and odours of wonderful smell: and this was done the third day.

   {6:45} Upon the fourth day thou commandedst that the sun should
shine, and the moon give her light, and the stars should be in order:

   {6:46} And gavest them a charge to do service unto man, that was to
be made.

   {6:47} Upon the fifth day thou saidst unto the seventh part, where
the waters were gathered that it should bring forth living creatures,
fowls and fishes: and so it came to pass.

   {6:48} For the dumb water and without life brought forth living
things at the commandment of God, that all people might praise thy
wondrous works.

   {6:49} Then didst thou ordain two living creatures, the one thou
calledst Enoch, and the other Leviathan;

   {6:50} And didst separate the one from the other: for the seventh
part, namely, where the water was gathered together, might not hold
them both.

   {6:51} Unto Enoch thou gavest one part, which was dried up the third
day, that he should dwell in the same part, wherein are a thousand
hills:

   {6:52} But unto Leviathan thou gavest the seventh part, namely, the
moist; and hast kept him to be devoured of whom thou wilt, and when.

   {6:53} Upon the sixth day thou gavest commandment unto the earth,
that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and creeping
things:

   {6:54} And after these, Adam also, whom thou madest lord of all thy
creatures: of him come we all, and the people also whom thou hast
chosen.

   {6:55} All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou
madest the world for our sakes

   {6:56} As for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou hast
said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle: and hast likened
the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a vessel.

   {6:57} And now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been
reputed as nothing, have begun to be lords over us, and to devour us.

   {6:58} But we thy people, whom thou hast called thy firstborn, thy
only begotten, and thy fervent lover, are given into their hands.

   {6:59} If the world now be made for our sakes, why do we not possess
an inheritance with the world? how long shall this endure?

   {7:1} And when I had made an end of speaking these words, there was
sent unto me the angel which had been sent unto me the nights afore:

   {7:2} And he said unto me, Up, Esdras, and hear the words that I am
come to tell thee.

   {7:3} And I said, Speak on, my God. Then said he unto me, The sea is
set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great.

   {7:4} But put the case the entrance were narrow, and like a river;

   {7:5} Who then could go into the sea to look upon it, and to rule
it? if he went not through the narrow, how could he come into the broad?

   {7:6} There is also another thing; A city is builded, and set upon a
broad field, and is full of all good things:

   {7:7} The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a dangerous
place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on
the left a deep water:

   {7:8} And one only path between them both, even between the fire and
the water, so small that there could but one man go there at once.

   {7:9} If this city now were given unto a man for an inheritance, if
he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall he receive this
inheritance?

   {7:10} And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he unto me, Even so
also is Israel's portion.

   {7:11} Because for their sakes I made the world: and when Adam
transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done.

   {7:12} Then were the entrances of this world made narrow, full of
sorrow and travail: they are but few and evil, full of perils,: and
very painful.

   {7:13} For the entrances of the elder world were wide and sure, and
brought immortal fruit.

   {7:14} If then they that live labour not to enter these strait and
vain things, they can never receive those that are laid up for them.

   {7:15} Now therefore why disquietest thou thyself, seeing thou art
but a corruptible man? and why art thou moved, whereas thou art but
mortal?

   {7:16} Why hast thou not considered in thy mind this thing that is
to come, rather than that which is present?

   {7:17} Then answered I and said, O Lord that bearest rule, thou hast
ordained in thy law, that the righteous should inherit these things,
but that the ungodly should perish.

   {7:18} Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer strait things, and
hope for wide: for they that have done wickedly have suffered the
strait things, and yet shall not see the wide.

   {7:19} And he said unto me. There is no judge above God, and none
that hath understanding above the Highest.

   {7:20} For there be many that perish in this life, because they
despise the law of God that is set before them.

   {7:21} For God hath given strait commandment to such as came, what
they should do to live, even as they came, and what they should observe
to avoid punishment.

   {7:22} Nevertheless they were not obedient unto him; but spake
against him, and imagined vain things;

   {7:23} And deceived themselves by their wicked deeds; and said of
the most High, that he is not; and knew not his ways:

   {7:24} But his law have they despised, and denied his covenants; in
his statutes have they not been faithful, and have not performed his
works.

   {7:25} And therefore, Esdras, for the empty are empty things, and
for the full are the full things.

   {7:26} Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens which I have
told thee shall come to pass, and the bride shall appear, and she
coming forth shall be seen, that now is withdrawn from the earth.

   {7:27} And whosoever is delivered from the foresaid evils shall see
my wonders.

   {7:28} For my son Jesus shall be revealed with those that be with
him, and they that remain shall rejoice within four hundred years.

   {7:29} After these years shall my son Christ die, and all men that
have life.

   {7:30} And the world shall be turned into the old silence seven
days, like as in the former judgments: so that no man shall remain.

   {7:31} And after seven days the world, that yet awaketh not, shall
be raised up, and that shall die that is corrupt

   {7:32} And the earth shall restore those that are asleep in her, and
so shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and the secret places
shall deliver those souls that were committed unto them.

   {7:33} And the most High shall appear upon the seat of judgment, and
misery shall pass away, and the long suffering shall have an end:

   {7:34} But judgment only shall remain, truth shall stand, and faith
shall wax strong:

   {7:35} And the work shall follow, and the reward shall be shewed,
and the good deeds shall be of force, and wicked deeds shall bear no
rule.

   {7:36} Then said I, Abraham prayed first for the Sodomites, and
Moses for the fathers that sinned in the wilderness:

   {7:37} And Jesus after him for Israel in the time of Achan:

   {7:38} And Samuel and David for the destruction: and Solomon for
them that should come to the sanctuary:

   {7:39} And Helias for those that received rain; and for the dead,
that he might live:

   {7:40} And Ezechias for the people in the time of Sennacherib: and
many for many.

   {7:41} Even so now, seeing corruption is grown up, and wickedness
increased, and the righteous have prayed for the ungodly: wherefore
shall it not be so now also?

   {7:42} He answered me, and said, This present life is not the end
where much glory doth abide; therefore have they prayed for the weak.

   {7:43} But the day of doom shall be the end of this time, and the
beginning of the immortality for to come, wherein corruption is past,

   {7:44} Intemperance is at an end, infidelity is cut off,
righteousness is grown, and truth is sprung up.

   {7:45} Then shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed, nor
to oppress him that hath gotten the victory.

   {7:46} I answered then and said, This is my first and last saying,
that it had been better not to have given the earth unto Adam: or else,
when it was given him, to have restrained him from sinning.

   {7:47} For what profit is it for men now in this present time to
live in heaviness, and after death to look for punishment?

   {7:48} O thou Adam, what hast thou done? for though it was thou that
sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that come of thee.

   {7:49} For what profit is it unto us, if there be promised us an
immortal time, whereas we have done the works that bring death?

   {7:50} And that there is promised us an everlasting hope, whereas
ourselves being most wicked are made vain?

   {7:51} And that there are laid up for us dwellings of health and
safety, whereas we have lived wickedly?

   {7:52} And that the glory of the most High is kept to defend them
which have led a wary life, whereas we have walked in the most wicked
ways of all?

   {7:53} And that there should be shewed a paradise, whose fruit
endureth for ever, wherein is security and medicine, since we shall not
enter into it?

   {7:54} (For we have walked in unpleasant places.)

   {7:55} And that the faces of them which have used abstinence shall
shine above the stars, whereas our faces shall be blacker than darkness?

   {7:56} For while we lived and committed iniquity, we considered not
that we should begin to suffer for it after death.

   {7:57} Then answered he me, and said, This is the condition of the
battle, which man that is born upon the earth shall fight;

   {7:58} That, if he be overcome, he shall suffer as thou hast said:
but if he get the victory, he shall receive the thing that I say.

   {7:59} For this is the life whereof Moses spake unto the people
while he lived, saying, Choose thee life, that thou mayest live.

   {7:60} Nevertheless they believed not him, nor yet the prophets
after him, no nor me which have spoken unto them,

   {7:61} That there should not be such heaviness in their destruction,
as shall be joy over them that are persuaded to salvation.

   {7:62} I answered then, and said, I know, Lord, that the most High
is called merciful, in that he hath mercy upon them which are not yet
come into the world,

   {7:63} And upon those also that turn to his law;

   {7:64} And that he is patient, and long suffereth those that have
sinned, as his creatures;

   {7:65} And that he is bountiful, for he is ready to give where it
needeth;

   {7:66} And that he is of great mercy, for he multiplieth more and
more mercies to them that are present, and that are past, and also to
them which are to come.

   {7:67} For if he shall not multiply his mercies, the world would not
continue with them that inherit therein.

   {7:68} And he pardoneth; for if he did not so of his goodness, that
they which have committed iniquities might be eased of them, the ten
thousandth part of men should not remain living.

   {7:69} And being judge, if he should not forgive them that are cured
with his word, and put out the multitude of contentions,

   {7:70} There should be very few left peradventure in an innumerable
multitude.

   {8:1} And he answered me, saying, The most High hath made this world
for many, but the world to come for few.

   {8:2} I will tell thee a similitude, Esdras; As when thou askest the
earth, it shall say unto thee, that it giveth much mould whereof
earthen vessels are made, but little dust that gold cometh of: even so
is the course of this present world.

   {8:3} There be many created, but few shall be saved.

   {8:4} So answered I and said, Swallow then down, O my soul,
understanding, and devour wisdom.

   {8:5} For thou hast agreed to give ear, and art willing to prophesy:
for thou hast no longer space than only to live.

   {8:6} O Lord, if thou suffer not thy servant, that we may pray
before thee, and thou give us seed unto our heart, and culture to our
understanding, that there may come fruit of it; how shall each man live
that is corrupt, who beareth the place of a man?

   {8:7} For thou art alone, and we all one workmanship of thine hands,
like as thou hast said.

   {8:8} For when the body is fashioned now in the mother's womb, and
thou givest it members, thy creature is preserved in fire and water,
and nine months doth thy workmanship endure thy creature which is
created in her.

   {8:9} But that which keepeth and is kept shall both be preserved:
and when the time cometh, the womb preserved delivereth up the things
that grew in it.

   {8:10} For thou hast commanded out of the parts of the body, that is
to say, out of the breasts, milk to be given, which is the fruit of the
breasts,

   {8:11} That the thing which is fashioned may be nourished for a
time, till thou disposest it to thy mercy.

   {8:12} Thou broughtest it up with thy righteousness, and nurturedst
it in thy law, and reformedst it with thy judgment.

   {8:13} And thou shalt mortify it as thy creature, and quicken it as
thy work.

   {8:14} If therefore thou shalt destroy him which with so great
labour was fashioned, it is an easy thing to be ordained by thy
commandment, that the thing which was made might be preserved.

   {8:15} Now therefore, Lord, I will speak; touching man in general,
thou knowest best; but touching thy people, for whose sake I am sorry;

   {8:16} And for thine inheritance, for whose cause I mourn; and for
Israel, for whom I am heavy; and for Jacob, for whose sake I am
troubled;

   {8:17} Therefore will I begin to pray before thee for myself and for
them: for I see the falls of us that dwell in the land.

   {8:18} But I have heard the swiftness of the judge which is to come.

   {8:19} Therefore hear my voice, and understand my words, and I shall
speak before thee. This is the beginning of the words of Esdras, before
he was taken up: and I said,

   {8:20} O Lord, thou that dwellest in everlastingness which beholdest
from above things in the heaven and in the air;

   {8:21} Whose throne is inestimable; whose glory may not be
comprehended; before whom the hosts of angels stand with trembling,

   {8:22} Whose service is conversant in wind and fire; whose word is
true, and sayings constant; whose commandment is strong, and ordinance
fearful;

   {8:23} Whose look drieth up the depths, and indignation maketh the
mountains to melt away; which the truth witnesseth:

   {8:24} O hear the prayer of thy servant, and give ear to the
petition of thy creature.

   {8:25} For while I live I will speak, and so long as I have
understanding I will answer.

   {8:26} O look not upon the sins of thy people; but on them which
serve thee in truth.

   {8:27} Regard not the wicked inventions of the heathen, but the
desire of those that keep thy testimonies in afflictions.

   {8:28} Think not upon those that have walked feignedly before thee:
but remember them, which according to thy will have known thy fear.

   {8:29} Let it not be thy will to destroy them which have lived like
beasts; but to look upon them that have clearly taught thy law.

   {8:30} Take thou no indignation at them which are deemed worse than
beasts; but love them that always put their trust in thy righteousness
and glory.

   {8:31} For we and our fathers do languish of such diseases: but
because of us sinners thou shalt be called merciful.

   {8:32} For if thou hast a desire to have mercy upon us, thou shalt
be called merciful, to us namely, that have no works of righteousness.

   {8:33} For the just, which have many good works laid up with thee,
shall out of their own deeds receive reward.

   {8:34} For what is man, that thou shouldest take displeasure at him?
or what is a corruptible generation, that thou shouldest be so bitter
toward it?

   {8:35} For in truth them is no man among them that be born, but he
hath dealt wickedly; and among the faithful there is none which hath
not done amiss.

   {8:36} For in this, O Lord, thy righteousness and thy goodness shall
be declared, if thou be merciful unto them which have not the
confidence of good works.

   {8:37} Then answered he me, and said, Some things hast thou spoken
aright, and according unto thy words it shall be.

   {8:38} For indeed I will not think on the disposition of them which
have sinned before death, before judgment, before destruction:

   {8:39} But I will rejoice over the disposition of the righteous, and
I will remember also their pilgrimage, and the salvation, and the
reward, that they shall have.

   {8:40} Like as I have spoken now, so shall it come to pass.

   {8:41} For as the husbandman soweth much seed upon the ground, and
planteth many trees, and yet the thing that is sown good in his season
cometh not up, neither doth all that is planted take root: even so is
it of them that are sown in the world; they shall not all be saved.

   {8:42} I answered then and said, If I have found grace, let me speak.

   {8:43} Like as the husbandman's seed perisheth, if it come not up,
and receive not thy rain in due season; or if there come too much rain,
and corrupt it:

   {8:44} Even so perisheth man also, which is formed with thy hands,
and is called thine own image, because thou art like unto him, for
whose sake thou hast made all things, and likened him unto the
husbandman's seed.

   {8:45} Be not wroth with us but spare thy people, and have mercy
upon thine own inheritance: for thou art merciful unto thy creature.

   {8:46} Then answered he me, and said, Things present are for the
present, and things to cometh for such as be to come.

   {8:47} For thou comest far short that thou shouldest be able to love
my creature more than I: but I have ofttimes drawn nigh unto thee, and
unto it, but never to the unrighteous.

   {8:48} In this also thou art marvellous before the most High:

   {8:49} In that thou hast humbled thyself, as it becometh thee, and
hast not judged thyself worthy to be much glorified among the righteous.

   {8:50} For many great miseries shall be done to them that in the
latter time shall dwell in the world, because they have walked in great
pride.

   {8:51} But understand thou for thyself, and seek out the glory for
such as be like thee.

   {8:52} For unto you is paradise opened, the tree of life is planted,
the time to come is prepared, plenteousness is made ready, a city is
builded, and rest is allowed, yea, perfect goodness and wisdom.

   {8:53} The root of evil is sealed up from you, weakness and the moth
is hid from you, and corruption is fled into hell to be forgotten:

   {8:54} Sorrows are passed, and in the end is shewed the treasure of
immortality.

   {8:55} And therefore ask thou no more questions concerning the
multitude of them that perish.

   {8:56} For when they had taken liberty, they despised the most High,
thought scorn of his law, and forsook his ways.

   {8:57} Moreover they have trodden down his righteous,

   {8:58} And said in their heart, that there is no God; yea, and that
knowing they must die.

   {8:59} For as the things aforesaid shalt receive you, so thirst and
pain are prepared for them: for it was not his will that men should
come to nought:

   {8:60} But they which be created have defiled the name of him that
made them, and were unthankful unto him which prepared life for them.

   {8:61} And therefore is my judgment now at hand.

   {8:62} These things have I not shewed unto all men, but unto thee,
and a few like thee. Then answered I and said,

   {8:63} Behold, O Lord, now hast thou shewed me the multitude of the
wonders, which thou wilt begin to do in the last times: but at what
time, thou hast not shewed me.

   {9:1} He answered me then, and said, Measure thou the time
diligently in itself: and when thou seest part of the signs past, which
I have told thee before,

   {9:2} Then shalt thou understand, that it is the very same time,
wherein the Highest will begin to visit the world which he made.

   {9:3} Therefore when there shall be seen earthquakes and uproars of
the people in the world:

   {9:4} Then shalt thou well understand, that the most High spake of
those things from the days that were before thee, even from the
beginning.

   {9:5} For like as all that is made in the world hath a beginning and
an end, and the end is manifest:

   {9:6} Even so the times also of the Highest have plain beginnings in
wonder and powerful works, and endings in effects and signs.

   {9:7} And every one that shall be saved, and shall be able to escape
by his works, and by faith, whereby ye have believed,

   {9:8} Shall be preserved from the said perils, and shall see my
salvation in my land, and within my borders: for I have sanctified them
for me from the beginning.

   {9:9} Then shall they be in pitiful case, which now have abused my
ways: and they that have cast them away despitefully shall dwell in
torments.

   {9:10} For such as in their life have received benefits, and have
not known me;

   {9:11} And they that have loathed my law, while they had yet
liberty, and, when as yet place of repentance was open unto them,
understood not, but despised it;

   {9:12} The same must know it after death by pain.

   {9:13} And therefore be thou not curious how the ungodly shall be
punished, and when: but enquire how the righteous shall be saved, whose
the world is, and for whom the world is created.

   {9:14} Then answered I and said,

   {9:15} I have said before, and now do speak, and will speak it also
hereafter, that there be many more of them which perish, than of them
which shall be saved:

   {9:16} Like as a wave is greater than a drop.

   {9:17} And he answered me, saying, Like as the field is, so is also
the seed; as the flowers be, such are the colours also; such as the
workman is, such also is the work; and as the husbandman ls himself, so
is his husbandry also: for it was the time of the world.

   {9:18} And now when I prepared the world, which was not yet made,
even for them to dwell in that now live, no man spake against me.

   {9:19} For then every one obeyed: but now the manners of them which
are created in this world that is made are corrupted by a perpetual
seed, and by a law which is unsearchable rid themselves.

   {9:20} So I considered the world, and, behold, there was peril
because of the devices that were come into it.

   {9:21} And I saw, and spared it greatly, and have kept me a grape of
the cluster, and a plant of a great people.

   {9:22} Let the multitude perish then, which was born in vain; and
let my grape be kept, and my plant; for with great labour have I made
it perfect.

   {9:23} Nevertheless, if thou wilt cease yet seven days more, (but
thou shalt not fast in them,

   {9:24} But go into a field of flowers, where no house is builded,
and eat only the flowers of the field; taste no flesh, drink no wine,
but eat flowers only;)

   {9:25} And pray unto the Highest continually, then will I come and
talk with thee.

   {9:26} So I went my way into the field which is called Ardath, like
as he commanded me; and there I sat among the flowers, and did eat of
the herbs of the field, and the meat of the same satisfied me.

   {9:27} After seven days I sat upon the grass, and my heart was vexed
within me, like as before:

   {9:28} And I opened my mouth, and began to talk before the most
High, and said,

   {9:29} O Lord, thou that shewest thyself unto us, thou wast shewed
unto our fathers in the wilderness, in a place where no man treadeth,
in a barren place, when they came out of Egypt.

   {9:30} And thou spakest saying, Hear me, O Israel; and mark my
words, thou seed of Jacob.

   {9:31} For, behold, I sow my law in you, and it shall bring fruit in
you, and ye shall be honoured in it for ever.

   {9:32} But our fathers, which received the law, kept it not, and
observed not thy ordinances: and though the fruit of thy law did not
perish, neither could it, for it was thine;

   {9:33} Yet they that received it perished, because they kept not the
thing that was sown in them.

   {9:34} And, lo, it ls a custom, when the ground hath received seed,
or the sea a ship, or any vessel meat or drink, that, that being
perished wherein it was sown or cast into,

   {9:35} That thing also which was sown, or cast therein, or received,
doth perish, and remaineth not with us: but with us it hath not
happened so.

   {9:36} For we that have received the law perish by sin, and our
heart also which received it

   {9:37} Notwithstanding the law perisheth not, but remaineth in his
force.

   {9:38} And when I spake these things in my heart, I looked back with
mine eyes, and upon the right side I saw a woman, and, behold, she
mourned and wept with a loud voice, and was much grieved in heart, and
her clothes were rent, and she had ashes upon her head.

   {9:39} Then let I my thoughts go that I was in, and turned me unto
her,

   {9:40} And said unto her, Wherefore weepest thou? why art thou so
grieved in thy mind?

   {9:41} And she said unto me, Sir, let me alone, that I may bewail
myself, and add unto my sorrow, for I am sore vexed in my mind, and
brought very low.

   {9:42} And I said unto her, What aileth thee? tell me.

   {9:43} She said unto me, I thy servant have been barren, and had no
child, though I had an husband thirty years,

   {9:44} And those thirty years I did nothing else day and night, and
every hour, but make my, prayer to the Highest.

   {9:45} After thirty years God heard me thine handmaid, looked upon
my misery, considered my trouble, and gave me a son: and I was very
glad of him, so was my husband also, and all my neighbours: and we gave
great honour unto the Almighty.

   {9:46} And I nourished him with great travail.

   {9:47} So when he grew up, and came to the time that he should have
a wife, I made a feast.

   {10:1} And it so came to pass, that when my son was entered into his
wedding chamber, he fell down, and died.

   {10:2} Then we all overthrew the lights, and all my neighbours rose
up to comfort me: so I took my rest unto the second day at night.

   {10:3} And it came to pass, when they had all left off to comfort
me, to the end I might be quiet; then rose I up by night and fled, and
came hither into this field, as thou seest.

   {10:4} And I do now purpose not to return into the city, but here to
stay, and neither to eat nor drink, but continually to mourn and to
fast until I die.

   {10:5} Then left I the meditations wherein I was, and spake to her
in anger, saying,

   {10:6} Thou foolish woman above all other, seest thou not our
mourning, and what happeneth unto us?

   {10:7} How that Sion our mother is full of all heaviness, and much
humbled, mourning very sore?

   {10:8} And now, seeing we all mourn and are sad, for we are all in
heaviness, art thou grieved for one son?

   {10:9} For ask the earth, and she shall tell thee, that it is she
which ought to mourn for the fall of so many that grow upon her.

   {10:10} For out of her came all at the first, and out of her shall
all others come, and, behold, they walk almost all into destruction,
and a multitude of them is utterly rooted out.

   {10:11} Who then should make more mourning than she, that hath lost
so great a multitude; and not thou, which art sorry but for one?

   {10:12} But if thou sayest unto me, My lamentation is not like the
earth's, because I have lost the fruit of my womb, which I brought
forth with pains, and bare with sorrows;

   {10:13} But the earth not so: for the multitude present in it
according to the course of the earth is gone, as it came:

   {10:14} Then say I unto thee, Like as thou hast brought forth with
labour; even so the earth also hath given her fruit, namely, man, ever
since the beginning unto him that made her.

   {10:15} Now therefore keep thy sorrow to thyself, and bear with a
good courage that which hath befallen thee.

   {10:16} For if thou shalt acknowledge the determination of God to be
just, thou shalt both receive thy son in time, and shalt be commended
among women.

   {10:17} Go thy way then into the city to thine husband.

   {10:18} And she said unto me, That will I not do: I will not go into
the city, but here will I die.

   {10:19} So I proceeded to speak further unto her, and said,

   {10:20} Do not so, but be counselled. by me: for how many are the
adversities of Sion? be comforted in regard of the sorrow of Jerusalem.

   {10:21} For thou seest that our sanctuary is laid waste, our altar
broken down, our temple destroyed;

   {10:22} Our psaltery is laid on the ground, our song is put to
silence, our rejoicing is at an end, the light of our candlestick is
put out, the ark of our covenant is spoiled, our holy things are
defiled, and the name that is called upon us is almost profaned: our
children are put to shame, our priests are burnt, our Levites are gone
into captivity, our virgins are defiled, and our wives ravished; our
righteous men carried away, our little ones destroyed, our young men
are brought in bondage, and our strong men are become weak;

   {10:23} And, which is the greatest of all, the seal of Sion hath now
lost her honour; for she is delivered into the hands of them that hate
us.

   {10:24} And therefore shake off thy great heaviness, and put away
the multitude of sorrows, that the Mighty may be merciful unto thee
again, and the Highest shall give thee rest and ease from thy labour.

   {10:25} And it came to pass while I was talking with her, behold,
her face upon a sudden shined exceedingly, and her countenance
glistered, so that I was afraid of her, and mused what it might be.

   {10:26} And, behold, suddenly she made a great cry very fearful: so
that the earth shook at the noise of the woman.

   {10:27} And I looked, and, behold, the woman appeared unto me no
more, but there was a city builded, and a large place shewed itself
from the foundations: then was I afraid, and cried with a loud voice,
and said,

   {10:28} Where is Uriel the angel, who came unto me at the first? for
he hath caused me to fall into many trances, and mine end is turned
into corruption, and my prayer to rebuke.

   {10:29} And as I was speaking these words behold, he came unto me,
and looked upon me.

   {10:30} And, lo, I lay as one that had been dead, and mine
understanding was taken from me: and he took me by the right hand, and
comforted me, and set me upon my feet, and said unto me,

   {10:31} What aileth thee? and why art thou so disquieted? and why is
thine understanding troubled, and the thoughts of thine heart?

   {10:32} And I said, Because thou hast forsaken me, and yet I did
according to thy words, and I went into the field, and, lo, I have
seen, and yet see, that I am not able to express.

   {10:33} And he said unto me, Stand up manfully, and I will advise
thee.

   {10:34} Then said I, Speak on, my lord, in me; only forsake me not,
lest I die frustrate of my hope.

   {10:35} For I have seen that I knew not, and hear that I do not know.

   {10:36} Or is my sense deceived, or my soul in a dream?

   {10:37} Now therefore I beseech thee that thou wilt shew thy servant
of this vision.

   {10:38} He answered me then, and said, Hear me, and I shall inform
thee, and tell thee wherefore thou art afraid: for the Highest will
reveal many secret things unto thee.

   {10:39} He hath seen that thy way is right: for that thou sorrowest
continually for thy people, and makest great lamentation for Sion.

   {10:40} This therefore is the meaning of the vision which thou
lately sawest:

   {10:41} Thou sawest a woman mourning, and thou begannest to comfort
her:

   {10:42} But now seest thou the likeness of the woman no more, but
there appeared unto thee a city builded.

   {10:43} And whereas she told thee of the death of her son, this is
the solution:

   {10:44} This woman, whom thou sawest is Sion: and whereas she said
unto thee, even she whom thou seest as a city builded,

   {10:45} Whereas, I say, she said unto thee, that she hath been
thirty years barren: those are the thirty years wherein there was no
offering made in her.

   {10:46} But after thirty years Solomon builded the city and offered
offerings: and then bare the barren a son.

   {10:47} And whereas she told thee that she nourished him with
labour: that was the dwelling in Jerusalem.

   {10:48} But whereas she said unto thee, That my son coming into his
marriage chamber happened to have a fail, and died: this was the
destruction that came to Jerusalem.

   {10:49} And, behold, thou sawest her likeness, and because she
mourned for her son, thou begannest to comfort her: and of these things
which have chanced, these are to be opened unto thee.

   {10:50} For now the most High seeth that thou art grieved
unfeignedly, and sufferest from thy whole heart for her, so hath he
shewed thee the brightness of her glory, and the comeliness of her
beauty:

   {10:51} And therefore I bade thee remain in the field where no house
was builded:

   {10:52} For I knew that the Highest would shew this unto thee.

   {10:53} Therefore I commanded thee to go into the field, where no
foundation of any building was.

   {10:54} For in the place wherein the Highest beginneth to shew his
city, there can no man's building be able to stand.

   {10:55} And therefore fear not, let not thine heart be affrighted,
but go thy way in, and see the beauty and greatness of the building, as
much as thine eyes be able to see:

   {10:56} And then shalt thou hear as much as thine ears may
comprehend.

   {10:57} For thou art blessed above many other, and art called with
the Highest; and so are but few.

   {10:58} But to morrow at night thou shalt remain here;

   {10:59} And so shall the Highest shew thee visions of the high
things, which the most High will do unto them that dwell upon the earth
in the last days. So I slept that night and another, like as he
commanded me.

   {11:1} Then saw I a dream, and, behold, there came up from the sea
an eagle, which had twelve feathered wings, and three heads.

   {11:2} And I saw, and, behold, she spread her wings over all the
earth, and all the winds of the air blew on her, and were gathered
together.

   {11:3} And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew other
contrary feathers; and they became little feathers and small.

   {11:4} But her heads were at rest: the head in the midst was greater
than the other, yet rested it with the residue.

   {11:5} Moreover I beheld, and, lo, the eagle flew with her feathers,
and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt therein.

   {11:6} And I saw that all things under heaven were subject unto her,
and no man spake against her, no, not one creature upon earth.

   {11:7} And I beheld, and, lo, the eagle rose upon her talons, and
spake to her feathers, saying,

   {11:8} Watch not all at once: sleep every one in his own place, and
watch by course:

   {11:9} But let the heads be preserved for the last.

   {11:10} And I beheld, and, lo, the voice went not out of her heads,
but from the midst of her body.

   {11:11} And I numbered her contrary feathers, and, behold, there
were eight of them.

   {11:12} And I looked, and, behold, on the right side there arose one
feather, and reigned over all the earth;

   {11:13} And so it was, that when it reigned, the end of it came, and
the place thereof appeared no more: so the next following stood up. and
reigned, and had a great time;

   {11:14} And it happened, that when it reigned, the end of it came
also, like as the first, so that it appeared no more.

   {11:15} Then came there a voice unto it, and said,

   {11:16} Hear thou that hast borne rule over the earth so long: this
I say unto thee, before thou beginnest to appear no more,

   {11:17} There shall none after thee attain unto thy time, neither
unto the half thereof.

   {11:18} Then arose the third, and reigned as the other before, and
appeared no more also.

   {11:19} So went it with all the residue one after another, as that
every one reigned, and then appeared no more.

   {11:20} Then I beheld, and, lo, in process of time the feathers that
followed stood up upon the right side, that they might rule also; and
some of them ruled, but within a while they appeared no more:

   {11:21} For some of them were set up, but ruled not.

   {11:22} After this I looked, and, behold, the twelve feathers
appeared no more, nor the two little feathers:

   {11:23} And there was no more upon the eagle's body, but three heads
that rested, and six little wings.

   {11:24} Then saw I also that two little feathers divided themselves
from the six, and remained under the head that was upon the right side:
for the four continued in their place.

   {11:25} And I beheld, and, lo, the feathers that were under the wing
thought to set up themselves and to have the rule.

   {11:26} And I beheld, and, lo, there was one set up, but shortly it
appeared no more.

   {11:27} And the second was sooner away than the first.

   {11:28} And I beheld, and, lo, the two that remained thought also in
themselves to reign:

   {11:29} And when they so thought, behold, there awaked one of the
heads that were at rest, namely, it that was in the midst; for that was
greater than the two other heads.

   {11:30} And then I saw that the two other heads were joined with it.

   {11:31} And, behold, the head was turned with them that were with
it, and did eat up the two feathers under the wing that would have
reigned.

   {11:32} But this head put the whole earth in fear, and bare rule in
it over all those that dwelt upon the earth with much oppression; and
it had the governance of the world more than all the wings that had
been.

   {11:33} And after this I beheld, and, lo, the head that was in the
midst suddenly appeared no more, like as the wings.

   {11:34} But there remained the two heads, which also in like sort
ruled upon the earth, and over those that dwelt therein.

   {11:35} And I beheld, and, lo, the head upon the right side devoured
it that was upon the left side.

   {11:36} Then I head a voice, which said unto me, Look before thee,
and consider the thing that thou seest.

   {11:37} And I beheld, and lo, as it were a roaring lion chased out
of the wood: and I saw that he sent out a man's voice unto the eagle,
and said,

   {11:38} Hear thou, I will talk with thee, and the Highest shall say
unto thee,

   {11:39} Art not thou it that remainest of the four beasts, whom I
made to reign in my world, that the end of their times might come
through them?

   {11:40} And the fourth came, and overcame all the beasts that were
past, and had power over the world with great fearfulness, and over the
whole compass of the earth with much wicked oppression; and so long
time dwelt he upon the earth with deceit.

   {11:41} For the earth hast thou not judged with truth.

   {11:42} For thou hast afflicted the meek, thou hast hurt the
peaceable, thou hast loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them
that brought forth fruit, and hast cast down the walls of such as did
thee no harm.

   {11:43} Therefore is thy wrongful dealing come up unto the Highest,
and thy pride unto the Mighty.

   {11:44} The Highest also hath looked upon the proud times, and,
behold, they are ended, and his abominations are fulfilled.

   {11:45} And therefore appear no more, thou eagle, nor thy horrible
wings, nor thy wicked feathers nor thy malicious heads, nor thy hurtful
claws, nor all thy vain body:

   {11:46} That all the earth may be refreshed, and may return, being
delivered from thy violence, and that she may hope for the judgment and
mercy of him that made her.

   {12:1} And it came to pass, whiles the lion spake these words unto
the eagle, I saw,

   {12:2} And, behold, the head that remained and the four wings
appeared no more, and the two went unto it and set themselves up to
reign, and their kingdom was small, and fill of uproar.

   {12:3} And I saw, and, behold, they appeared no more, and the whole
body of the eagle was burnt so that the earth was in great fear: then
awaked I out of the trouble and trance of my mind, and from great fear,
and said unto my spirit,

   {12:4} Lo, this hast thou done unto me, in that thou searchest out
the ways of the Highest.

   {12:5} Lo, yet am I weary in my mind, and very weak in my spirit;
and little strength is there in me, for the great fear wherewith I was
afflicted this night.

   {12:6} Therefore will I now beseech the Highest, that he will
comfort me unto the end.

   {12:7} And I said, Lord that bearest rule, if I have found grace
before thy sight, and if I am justified with thee before many others,
and if my prayer indeed be come up before thy face;

   {12:8} Comfort me then, and shew me thy servant the interpretation
and plain difference of this fearful vision, that thou mayest perfectly
comfort my soul.

   {12:9} For thou hast judged me worthy to shew me the last times.

   {12:10} And he said unto me, This is the interpretation of the
vision:

   {12:11} The eagle, whom thou sawest come up from the sea, is the
kingdom which was seen in the vision of thy brother Daniel.

   {12:12} But it was not expounded unto him, therefore now I declare
it unto thee.

   {12:13} Behold, the days will come, that there shall rise up a
kingdom upon earth, and it shall be feared above all the kingdoms that
were before it.

   {12:14} In the same shall twelve kings reign, one after another:

   {12:15} Whereof the second shall begin to reign, and shall have more
time than any of the twelve.

   {12:16} And this do the twelve wings signify, which thou sawest.

   {12:17} As for the voice which thou heardest speak, and that thou
sawest not to go out from the heads but from the midst of the body
thereof, this is the interpretation:

   {12:18} That after the time of that kingdom there shall arise great
strivings, and it shall stand in peril of failing: nevertheless it
shall not then fall, but shall be restored again to his beginning.

   {12:19} And whereas thou sawest the eight small under feathers
sticking to her wings, this is the interpretation:

   {12:20} That in him there shall arise eight kings, whose times shall
be but small, and their years swift.

   {12:21} And two of them shall perish, the middle time approaching:
four shall be kept until their end begin to approach: but two shall be
kept unto the end.

   {12:22} And whereas thou sawest three heads resting, this is the
interpretation:

   {12:23} In his last days shall the most High raise up three
kingdoms, and renew many things therein, and they shall have the
dominion of the earth,

   {12:24} And of those that dwell therein, with much oppression, above
all those that were before them: therefore are they called the heads of
the eagle.

   {12:25} For these are they that shall accomplish his wickedness, and
that shall finish his last end.

   {12:26} And whereas thou sawest that the great head appeared no
more, it signifieth that one of them shall die upon his bed, and yet
with pain.

   {12:27} For the two that remain shall be slain with the sword.

   {12:28} For the sword of the one shall devour the other: but at the
last shall he fall through the sword himself.

   {12:29} And whereas thou sawest two feathers under the wings passing
over the head that is on the right side;

   {12:30} It signifieth that these are they, whom the Highest hath
kept unto their end: this is the small kingdom and full of trouble, as
thou sawest.

   {12:31} And the lion, whom thou sawest rising up out of the wood,
and roaring, and speaking to the eagle, and rebuking her for her
unrighteousness with all the words which thou hast heard;

   {12:32} This is the anointed, which the Highest hath kept for them
and for their wickedness unto the end: he shall reprove them, and shall
upbraid them with their cruelty.

   {12:33} For he shall set them before him alive in judgment, and
shall rebuke them, and correct them.

   {12:34} For the rest of my people shall he deliver with mercy, those
that have been pressed upon my borders, and he shall make them joyful
until the coming of the day of judgment, whereof I have spoken unto
thee from the the beginning.

   {12:35} This is the dream that thou sawest, and these are the
interpretations.

   {12:36} Thou only hast been meet to know this secret of the Highest.

   {12:37} Therefore write all these things that thou hast seen in a
book, and hide them:

   {12:38} And teach them to the wise of the people, whose hearts thou
knowest may comprehend and keep these secrets.

   {12:39} But wait thou here thyself yet seven days more, that it may
be shewed thee, whatsoever it pleaseth the Highest to declare unto
thee. And with that he went his way.

   {12:40} And it came to pass, when all the people saw that the seven
days were past, and I not come again into the city, they gathered them
all together, from the least unto the greatest, and came unto me, and
said,

   {12:41} What have we offended thee? and what evil have we done
against thee, that thou forsakest us, and sittest here in this place?

   {12:42} For of all the prophets thou only art left us, as a cluster
of the vintage, and as a candle in a dark place, and as a haven or ship
preserved from the tempest.

   {12:43} Are not the evils which are come to us sufficient?

   {12:44} If thou shalt forsake us, how much better had it been for
us, if we also had been burned in the midst of Sion?

   {12:45} For we are not better than they that died there. And they
wept with a loud voice. Then answered I them, and said,

   {12:46} Be of good comfort, O Israel; and be not heavy, thou house
of Jacob:

   {12:47} For the Highest hath you in remembrance, and the Mighty hath
not forgotten you in temptation.

   {12:48} As for me, I have not forsaken you, neither am I departed
from you: but am come into this place, to pray for the desolation of
Sion, and that I might seek mercy for the low estate of your sanctuary.

   {12:49} And now go your way home every man, and after these days
will I come unto you.

   {12:50} So the people went their way into the city, like as I
commanded them:

   {12:51} But I remained still in the field seven days, as the angel
commanded me; and did eat only in those days of the flowers of the
field, and had my meat of the herbs

   {13:1} And it came to pass after seven days, I dreamed a dream by
night:

   {13:2} And, lo, there arose a wind from the sea, that it moved all
the waves thereof.

   {13:3} And I beheld, and, lo, that man waxed strong with the
thousands of heaven: and when he turned his countenance to look, all
the things trembled that were seen under him.

   {13:4} And whensoever the voice went out of his mouth, all they
burned that heard his voice, like as the earth faileth when it feeleth
the fire.

   {13:5} And after this I beheld, and, lo, there was gathered together
a multitude of men, out of number, from the four winds of the heaven,
to subdue the man that came out of the sea

   {13:6} But I beheld, and, lo, he had graved himself a great
mountain, and flew up upon it.

   {13:7} But I would have seen the region or place whereout the hill
was graven, and I could not.

   {13:8} And after this I beheld, and, lo, all they which were
gathered together to subdue him were sore afraid, and yet durst fight.

   {13:9} And, lo, as he saw the violence of the multitude that came,
he neither lifted up his hand, nor held sword, nor any instrument of
war:

   {13:10} But only I saw that he sent out of his mouth as it had been
a blast of fire, and out of his lips a flaming breath, and out of his
tongue he cast out sparks and tempests.

   {13:11} And they were all mixed together; the blast of fire, the
flaming breath, and the great tempest; and fell with violence upon the
multitude which was prepared to fight, and burned them up every one, so
that upon a sudden of an innumerable multitude nothing was to be
perceived, but only dust and smell of smoke: when I saw this I was
afraid.

   {13:12} Afterward saw I the same man come down from the mountain,
and call unto him another peaceable Multitude.

   {13:13} And there came much people unto him, whereof some were glad,
some were sorry, and some of them were bound, and other some brought of
them that were offered: then was I sick through great fear, and I
awaked, and said,

   {13:14} Thou hast shewed thy servant these wonders from the
beginning, and hast counted me worthy that thou shouldest receive my
prayer:

   {13:15} Shew me now yet the interpretation of this dream.

   {13:16} For as I conceive in mine understanding, woe unto them that
shall be left in those days and much more woe unto them that are not
left behind!

   {13:17} For they that were not left were in heaviness.

   {13:18} Now understand I the things that are laid up in the latter
days, which shall happen unto them, and to those that are left behind.

   {13:19} Therefore are they come into great perils and many
necessities, like as these dreams declare.

   {13:20} Yet is it easier for him that is in danger to come into
these things, than to pass away as a cloud out of the world, and not to
see the things that happen in the last days. And he answered unto me,
and said,

   {13:21} The interpretation of the vision shall I shew thee, and I
will open unto thee the thing that thou hast required.

   {13:22} Whereas thou hast spoken of them that are left behind, this
is the interpretation:

   {13:23} He that shall endure the peril in that time hath kept
himself: they that be fallen into danger are such as have works, and
faith toward the Almighty.

   {13:24} Know this therefore, that they which be left behind are more
blessed than they that be dead.

   {13:25} This is the meaning of the vision: Whereas thou sawest a man
coming up from the midst of the sea:

   {13:26} The same is he whom God the Highest hath kept a great
season, which by his own self shall deliver his creature: and he shall
order them that are left behind.

   {13:27} And whereas thou sawest, that out of his mouth there came as
a blast of wind, and fire, and storm;

   {13:28} And that he held neither sword, nor any instrument of war,
but that the rushing in of him destroyed the whole multitude that came
to subdue him; this is the interpretation:

   {13:29} Behold, the days come, when the most High will begin to
deliver them that are upon the earth.

   {13:30} And he shall come to the astonishment of them that dwell on
the earth.

   {13:31} And one shall undertake to fight against another, one city
against another, one place against another, one people against another,
and one realm against another.

   {13:32} And the time shall be when these things shall come to pass,
and the signs shall happen which I shewed thee before, and then shall
my Son be declared, whom thou sawest as a man ascending.

   {13:33} And when all the people hear his voice, every man shall in
their own land leave the battle they have one against another.

   {13:34} And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as
thou sawest them, willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting.

   {13:35} But he shall stand upon the top of the mount Sion.

   {13:36} And Sion shall come, and shall be shewed to all men, being
prepared and builded, like as thou sawest the hill graven without hands.

   {13:37} And this my Son shall rebuke the wicked inventions of those
nations, which for their wicked life are fallen into the tempest;

   {13:38} And shall lay before them their evil thoughts, and the
torments wherewith they shall begin to be tormented, which are like
unto a flame: and he shall destroy them without labour by the law which
is like unto me.

   {13:39} And whereas thou sawest that he gathered another peaceable
multitude unto him;

   {13:40} Those are the ten tribes, which were carried away prisoners
out of their own land in the time of Osea the king, whom Salmanasar the
king of Assyria led away captive, and he carried them over the waters,
and so came they into another land.

   {13:41} But they took this counsel among themselves, that they would
leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further
country, where never mankind dwelt,

   {13:42} That they might there keep their statutes, which they never
kept in their own land.

   {13:43} And they entered into Euphrates by the narrow places of the
river.

   {13:44} For the most High then shewed signs for them, and held still
the flood, till they were passed over.

   {13:45} For through that country there was a great way to go,
namely, of a year and a half: and the same region is called Arsareth.

   {13:46} Then dwelt they there until the latter time; and now when
they shall begin to come,

   {13:47} The Highest shall stay the springs of the stream again, that
they may go through: therefore sawest thou the multitude with peace.

   {13:48} But those that be left behind of thy people are they that
are found within my borders.

   {13:49} Now when he destroyeth the multitude of the nations that are
gathered together, he shall defend his people that remain.

   {13:50} And then shall he shew them great wonders.

   {13:51} Then said I, O Lord that bearest rule, shew me this:
Wherefore have I seen the man coming up from the midst of the sea?

   {13:52} And he said unto me, Like as thou canst neither seek out nor
know the things that are in the deep of the sea: even so can no man
upon earth see my Son, or those that be with him, but in the day time.

   {13:53} This is the interpretation of the dream which thou sawest,
and whereby thou only art here lightened.

   {13:54} For thou hast forsaken thine own way, and applied thy
diligence unto my law, and sought it.

   {13:55} Thy life hast thou ordered in wisdom, and hast called
understanding thy mother.

   {13:56} And therefore have I shewed thee the treasures of the
Highest: after other three days I will speak other things unto thee,
and declare unto thee mighty and wondrous things.

   {13:57} Then went I forth into the field, giving praise and thanks
greatly unto the most High because of his wonders which he did in time;

   {13:58} And because he governeth the same, and such things as fall
in their seasons: and there I sat three days.

   {14:1} And it came to pass upon the third day, I sat under an oak,
and, behold, there came a voice out of a bush over against me, and
said, Esdras, Esdras.

   {14:2} And I said, Here am I, Lord And I stood up upon my feet.

   {14:3} Then said he unto me, In the bush I did manifestly reveal
myself unto Moses, and talked with him, when my people served in Egypt:

   {14:4} And I sent him and led my people out of Egypt, and brought
him up to the mount of where I held him by me a long season,

   {14:5} And told him many wondrous things, and shewed him the secrets
of the times, and the end; and commanded him, saying,

   {14:6} These words shalt thou declare, and these shalt thou hide.

   {14:7} And now I say unto thee,

   {14:8} That thou lay up in thy heart the signs that I have shewed,
and the dreams that thou hast seen, and the interpretations which thou
hast heard:

   {14:9} For thou shalt be taken away from all, and from henceforth
thou shalt remain with my Son, and with such as be like thee, until the
times be ended.

   {14:10} For the world hath lost his youth, and the times begin to
wax old.

   {14:11} For the world is divided into twelve parts, and the ten
parts of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part:

   {14:12} And there remaineth that which is after the half of the
tenth part.

   {14:13} Now therefore set thine house in order, and reprove thy
people, comfort such of them as be in trouble, and now renounce
corruption,

   {14:14} Let go from thee mortal thoughts, cast away the burdens of
man, put off now the weak nature,

   {14:15} And set aside the thoughts that are most heavy unto thee,
and haste thee to flee from these times.

   {14:16} For yet greater evils than those which thou hast seen happen
shall be done hereafter.

   {14:17} For look how much the world shall be weaker through age, so
much the more shall evils increase upon them that dwell therein.

   {14:18} For the time is fled far away, and leasing is hard at hand:
for now hasteth the vision to come, which thou hast seen.

   {14:19} Then answered I before thee, and said,

   {14:20} Behold, Lord, I will go, as thou hast commanded me, and
reprove the people which are present: but they that shall be born
afterward, who shall admonish them? thus the world is set in darkness,
and they that dwell therein are without light.

   {14:21} For thy law is burnt, therefore no man knoweth the things
that are done of thee, or the work that shall begin.

   {14:22} But if I have found grace before thee, send the Holy Ghost
into me, and I shall write all that hath been done in the world since
the beginning, which were written in thy law, that men may find thy
path, and that they which will live in the latter days may live.

   {14:23} And he answered me, saying, Go thy way, gather the people
together, and say unto them, that they seek thee not for forty days.

   {14:24} But look thou prepare thee many box trees, and take with
thee Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Ecanus, and Asiel, these five which are
ready to write swiftly;

   {14:25} And come hither, and I shall light a candle of understanding
in thine heart, which shall not be put out, till the things be
performed which thou shalt begin to write.

   {14:26} And when thou hast done, some things shalt thou publish, and
some things shalt thou shew secretly to the wise: to morrow this hour
shalt thou begin to write.

   {14:27} Then went I forth, as he commanded, and gathered all the
people together, and said,

   {14:28} Hear these words, O Israel.

   {14:29} Our fathers at the beginning were strangers in Egypt, from
whence they were delivered:

   {14:30} And received the law of life, which they kept not, which ye
also have transgressed after them.

   {14:31} Then was the land, even the land of Sion, parted among you
by lot: but your fathers, and ye yourselves, have done unrighteousness,
and have not kept the ways which the Highest commanded you.

   {14:32} And forasmuch as he is a righteous judge, he took from you
in time the thing that he had given you.

   {14:33} And now are ye here, and your brethren among you.

   {14:34} Therefore if so be that ye will subdue your own
understanding, and reform your hearts, ye shall be kept alive and after
death ye shall obtain mercy.

   {14:35} For after death shall the judgment come, when we shall live
again: and then shall the names of the righteous be manifest, and the
works of the ungodly shall be declared.

   {14:36} Let no man therefore come unto me now, nor seek after me
these forty days.

   {14:37} So I took the five men, as he commanded me, and we went into
the field, and remained there.

   {14:38} And the next day, behold, a voice called me, saying, Esdras,
open thy mouth, and drink that I give thee to drink.

   {14:39} Then opened I my mouth, and, behold, he reached me a full
cup, which was full as it were with water, but the colour of it was
like fire.

   {14:40} And I took it, and drank: and when I had drunk of it, my
heart uttered understanding, and wisdom grew in my breast, for my
spirit strengthened my memory:

   {14:41} And my mouth was opened, and shut no more.

   {14:42} The Highest gave understanding unto the five men, and they
wrote the wonderful visions of the night that were told, which they
knew not: and they sat forty days, and they wrote in the day, and at
night they ate bread.

   {14:43} As for me. I spake in the day, and I held not my tongue by
night.

   {14:44} In forty days they wrote two hundred and four books.

   {14:45} And it came to pass, when the forty days were filled, that
the Highest spake, saying, The first that thou hast written publish
openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it:

   {14:46} But keep the seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them
only to such as be wise among the people:

   {14:47} For in them is the spring of understanding, the fountain of
wisdom, and the stream of knowledge.

   {14:48} And I did so.

   {15:1} Behold, speak thou in the ears of my people the words of
prophecy, which I will put in thy mouth, saith the Lord:

   {15:2} And cause them to be written in paper: for they are faithful
and true.

   {15:3} Fear not the imaginations against thee, let not the
incredulity of them trouble thee, that speak against thee.

   {15:4} For all the unfaithful shall die in their unfaithfulness.

   {15:5} Behold, saith the Lord, I will bring plagues upon the world;
the sword, famine, death, and destruction.

   {15:6} For wickedness hath exceedingly polluted the whole earth, and
their hurtful works are fulfilled.

   {15:7} Therefore saith the Lord,

   {15:8} I will hold my tongue no more as touching their wickedness,
which they profanely commit, neither will I suffer them in those
things, in which they wickedly exercise themselves: behold, the
innocent and righteous blood crieth unto me, and the souls of the just
complain continually.

   {15:9} And therefore, saith the Lord, I will surely avenge them, and
receive unto me all the innocent blood from among them.

   {15:10} Behold, my people is led as a flock to the slaughter: I will
not suffer them now to dwell in the land of Egypt:

   {15:11} But I will bring them with a mighty hand and a stretched out
arm, and smite Egypt with plagues, as before, and will destroy all the
land thereof.

   {15:12} Egypt shall mourn, and the foundation of it shall be smitten
with the plague and punishment that God shall bring upon it.

   {15:13} They that till the ground shall mourn: for their seeds shall
fail through the blasting and hail, and with a fearful constellation.

   {15:14} Woe to the world and them that dwell therein!

   {15:15} For the sword and their destruction draweth nigh, and one
people shall stand up and fight against another, and swords in their
hands.

   {15:16} For there shall be sedition among men, and invading one
another; they shall not regard their kings nor princes, and the course
of their actions shall stand in their power.

   {15:17} A man shall desire to go into a city, and shall not be able.

   {15:18} For because of their pride the cities shall be troubled, the
houses shall be destroyed, and men shall be afraid.

   {15:19} A man shall have no pity upon his neighbour, but shall
destroy their houses with the sword, and spoil their goods, because of
the lack of bread, and for great tribulation.

   {15:20} Behold, saith God, I will call together all the kings of the
earth to reverence me, which are from the rising of the sun, from the
south, from the east, and Libanus; to turn themselves one against
another, and repay the things that they have done to them.

   {15:21} Like as they do yet this day unto my chosen, so will I do
also, and recompense in their bosom. Thus saith the Lord God;

   {15:22} My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and my sword
shall not cease over them that shed innocent blood upon the earth.

   {15:23} The fire is gone forth from his wrath, and hath consumed the
foundations of the earth, and the sinners, like the straw that is
kindled.

   {15:24} Woe to them that sin, and keep not my commandments! saith
the Lord.

   {15:25} I will not spare them: go your way, ye children, from the
power, defile not my sanctuary.

   {15:26} For the Lord knoweth all them that sin against him, and
therefore delivereth he them unto death and destruction.

   {15:27} For now are the plagues come upon the whole earth and ye
shall remain in them: for God shall not deliver you, because ye have
sinned against him.

   {15:28} Behold an horrible vision, and the appearance thereof from
the east:

   {15:29} Where the nations of the dragons of Arabia shall come out
with many chariots, and the multitude of them shall be carried as the
wind upon earth, that all they which hear them may fear and tremble.

   {15:30} Also the Carmanians raging in wrath shall go forth as the
wild boars of the wood, and with great power shall they come, and join
battle with them, and shall waste a portion of the land of the
Assyrians.

   {15:31} And then shall the dragons have the upper hand, remembering
their nature; and if they shall turn themselves, conspiring together in
great power to persecute them,

   {15:32} Then these shall be troubled bled, and keep silence through
their power, and shall flee.

   {15:33} And from the land of the Assyrians shall the enemy besiege
them, and consume some of them, and in their host shall be fear and
dread, and strife among their kings.

   {15:34} Behold clouds from the east and from the north unto the
south, and they are very horrible to look upon, full of wrath and storm.

   {15:35} They shall smite one upon another, and they shall smite down
a great multitude of stars upon the earth, even their own star; and
blood shall be from the sword unto the belly,

   {15:36} And dung of men unto the camel's hough.

   {15:37} And there shall be great fearfulness and trembling upon
earth: and they that see the wrath shall be afraid, and trembling shall
come upon them.

   {15:38} And then shall there come great storms from the south, and
from the north, and another part from the west.

   {15:39} And strong winds shall arise from the east, and shall open
it; and the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and the star stirred to
cause fear toward the east and west wind, shall be destroyed.

   {15:40} The great and mighty clouds shall be puffed up full of
wrath, and the star, that they may make all the earth afraid, and them
that dwell therein; and they shall pour out over every high and eminent
place an horrible star,

   {15:41} Fire, and hail, and flying swords, and many waters, that all
fields may be full, and all rivers, with the abundance of great waters.

   {15:42} And they shall break down the cities and walls, mountains
and hills, trees of the wood, and grass of the meadows, and their corn.

   {15:43} And they shall go stedfastly unto Babylon, and make her
afraid.

   {15:44} They shall come to her, and besiege her, the star and all
wrath shall they pour out upon her: then shall the dust and smoke go up
unto the heaven, and all they that be about her shall bewail her.

   {15:45} And they that remain under her shall do service unto them
that have put her in fear.

   {15:46} And thou, Asia, that art partaker of the hope of Babylon,
and art the glory of her person:

   {15:47} Woe be unto thee, thou wretch, because thou hast made
thyself like unto her; and hast decked thy daughters in whoredom, that
they might please and glory in thy lovers, which have always desired to
commit whoredom with thee.

   {15:48} Thou hast followed her that is hated in all her works and
inventions: therefore saith God,

   {15:49} I will send plagues upon thee; widowhood, poverty, famine,
sword, and pestilence, to waste thy houses with destruction and death.

   {15:50} And the glory of thy Power shall be dried up as a flower,
the heat shall arise that is sent over thee.

   {15:51} Thou shalt be weakened as a poor woman with stripes, and as
one chastised with wounds, so that the mighty and lovers shall not be
able to receive thee.

   {15:52} Would I with jealousy have so proceeded against thee, saith
the Lord,

   {15:53} If thou hadst not always slain my chosen, exalting the
stroke of thine hands, and saying over their dead, when thou wast
drunken,

   {15:54} Set forth the beauty of thy countenance?

   {15:55} The reward of thy whoredom shall be in thy bosom, therefore
shalt thou receive recompence.

   {15:56} Like as thou hast done unto my chosen, saith the Lord, even
so shall God do unto thee, and shall deliver thee into mischief

   {15:57} Thy children shall die of hunger, and thou shalt fall
through the sword: thy cities shall be broken down, and all thine shall
perish with the sword in the field.

   {15:58} They that be in the mountains shall die of hunger, and eat
their own flesh, and drink their own blood, for very hunger of bread,
and thirst of water.

   {15:59} Thou as unhappy shalt come through the sea, and receive
plagues again.

   {15:60} And in the passage they shall rush on the idle city, and
shall destroy some portion of thy land, and consume part of thy glory,
and shall return to Babylon that was destroyed.

   {15:61} And thou shalt be cast down by them as stubble, and they
shall be unto thee as fire;

   {15:62} And shall consume thee, and thy cities, thy land, and thy
mountains; all thy woods and thy fruitful trees shall they burn up with
fire.

   {15:63} Thy children shall they carry away captive, and, look, what
thou hast, they shall spoil it, and mar the beauty of thy face.

   {16:1} Woe be unto thee, Babylon, and Asia! woe be unto thee, Egypt
and Syria!

   {16:2} Gird up yourselves with cloths of sack and hair, bewail your
children, and be sorry; for your destruction is at hand.

   {16:3} A sword is sent upon you, and who may turn it back?

   {16:4} A fire is sent among you, and who may quench it?

   {16:5} Plagues are sent unto you, and what is he that may drive them
away?

   {16:6} May any man drive away an hungry lion in the wood? or may any
one quench the fire in stubble, when it hath begun to burn?

   {16:7} May one turn again the arrow that is shot of a strong archer?

   {16:8} The mighty Lord sendeth the plagues and who is he that can
drive them away?

   {16:9} A fire shall go forth from his wrath, and who is he that may
quench it?

   {16:10} He shall cast lightnings, and who shall not fear? he shall
thunder, and who shall not be afraid?

   {16:11} The Lord shall threaten, and who shall not be utterly beaten
to powder at his presence?

   {16:12} The earth quaketh, and the foundations thereof; the sea
ariseth up with waves from the deep, and the waves of it are troubled,
and the fishes thereof also, before the Lord, and before the glory of
his power:

   {16:13} For strong is his right hand that bendeth the bow, his
arrows that he shooteth are sharp, and shall not miss, when they begin
to be shot into the ends of the world.

   {16:14} Behold, the plagues are sent, and shall not return again,
until they come upon the earth.

   {16:15} The fire is kindled, and shall not be put out, till it
consume the foundation of the earth.

   {16:16} Like as an arrow which is shot of a mighty archer returneth
not backward: even so the plagues that shall be sent upon earth shall
not return again.

   {16:17} Woe is me! woe is me! who will deliver me in those days?

   {16:18} The beginning of sorrows and great mournings; the beginning
of famine and great death; the beginning of wars, and the powers shall
stand in fear; the beginning of evils! what shall I do when these evils
shall come?

   {16:19} Behold, famine and plague, tribulation and anguish, are sent
as scourges for amendment.

   {16:20} But for all these things they shall not turn from their
wickedness, nor be always mindful of the scourges.

   {16:21} Behold, victuals shall be so good cheap upon earth, that
they shall think themselves to be in good case, and even then shall
evils grow upon earth, sword, famine, and great confusion.

   {16:22} For many of them that dwell upon earth shall perish of
famine; and the other, that escape the hunger, shall the sword destroy.

   {16:23} And the dead shall be cast out as dung, and there shall be
no man to comfort them: for the earth shall be wasted, and the cities
shall be cast down.

   {16:24} There shall be no man left to till the earth, and to sow it

   {16:25} The trees shall give fruit, and who shall gather them?

   {16:26} The grapes shall ripen, and who shall tread them? for all
places shall be desolate of men:

   {16:27} So that one man shall desire to see another, and to hear his
voice.

   {16:28} For of a city there shall be ten left, and two of the field,
which shall hide themselves in the thick groves, and in the clefts of
the rocks.

   {16:29} As in an orchard of Olives upon every tree there are left
three or four olives;

   {16:30} Or as when a vineyard is gathered, there are left some
clusters of them that diligently seek through the vineyard:

   {16:31} Even so in those days there shall be three or four left by
them that search their houses with the sword.

   {16:32} And the earth shall be laid waste, and the fields thereof
shall wax old, and her ways and all her paths shall grow full of
thorns, because no man shall travel therethrough.

   {16:33} The virgins shall mourn, having no bridegrooms; the women
shall mourn, having no husbands; their daughters shall mourn, having no
helpers.

   {16:34} In the wars shall their bridegrooms be destroyed, and their
husbands shall perish of famine.

   {16:35} Hear now these things and understand them, ye servants of
the Lord.

   {16:36} Behold, the word of the Lord, receive it: believe not the
gods of whom the Lord spake.

   {16:37} Behold, the plagues draw nigh, and are not slack.

   {16:38} As when a woman with child in the ninth month bringeth forth
her son, with two or three hours of her birth great pains compass her
womb, which pains, when the child cometh forth, they slack not a moment:

   {16:39} Even so shall not the plagues be slack to come upon the
earth, and the world shall mourn, and sorrows shall come upon it on
every side.

   {16:40} O my people, hear my word: make you ready to thy battle, and
in those evils be even as pilgrims upon the earth.

   {16:41} He that selleth, let him be as he that fleeth away: and he
that buyeth, as one that will lose:

   {16:42} He that occupieth merchandise, as he that hath no profit by
it: and he that buildeth, as he that shall not dwell therein:

   {16:43} He that soweth, as if he should not reap: so also he that
planteth the vineyard, as he that shall not gather the grapes:

   {16:44} They that marry, as they that shall get no children; and
they that marry not, as the widowers.

   {16:45} And therefore they that labour labour in vain:

   {16:46} For strangers shall reap their fruits, and spoil their
goods, overthrow their houses, and take their children captives, for in
captivity and famine shall they get children.

   {16:47} And they that occupy their merchandise with robbery, the
more they deck their cities, their houses, their possessions, and their
own persons:

   {16:48} The more will I be angry with them for their sin, saith the
Lord.

   {16:49} Like as a whore envieth a right honest and virtuous woman:

   {16:50} So shall righteousness hate iniquity, when she decketh
herself, and shall accuse her to her face, when he cometh that shall
defend him that diligently searcheth out every sin upon earth.

   {16:51} And therefore be ye not like thereunto, nor to the works
thereof.

   {16:52} For yet a little, and iniquity shall be taken away out of
the earth, and righteousness shall reign among you.

   {16:53} Let not the sinner say that he hath not sinned: for God
shall burn coals of fire upon his head, which saith before the Lord God
and his glory, I have not sinned.

   {16:54} Behold, the Lord knoweth all the works of men, their
imaginations, their thoughts, and their hearts:

   {16:55} Which spake but the word, Let the earth be made; and it was
made: Let the heaven be made; and it was created.

   {16:56} In his word were the stars made, and he knoweth the number
of them.

   {16:57} He searcheth the deep, and the treasures thereof; he hath
measured the sea, and what it containeth.

   {16:58} He hath shut the sea in the midst of the waters, and with
his word hath he hanged the earth upon the waters.

   {16:59} He spreadeth out the heavens like a vault; upon the waters
hath he founded it.

   {16:60} In the desert hath he made springs of water, and pools upon
the tops of the mountains, that the floods might pour down from the
high rocks to water the earth.

   {16:61} He made man, and put his heart in the midst of the body, and
gave him breath, life, and understanding.

   {16:62} Yea and the Spirit of Almighty God, which made all things,
and searcheth out all hidden things in the secrets of the earth,

   {16:63} Surely he knoweth your inventions, and what ye think in your
hearts, even them that sin, and would hide their sin.

   {16:64} Therefore hath the Lord exactly searched out all your works,
and he will put you all to shame.

   {16:65} And when your sins are brought forth, ye shall be ashamed
before men, and your own sins shall be your accusers in that day.

   {16:66} What will ye do? or how will ye hide your sins before God
and his angels?

   {16:67} Behold, God himself is the judge, fear him: leave off from
your sins, and forget your iniquities, to meddle no more with them for
ever: so shall God lead you forth, and deliver you from all trouble.

   {16:68} For, behold, the burning wrath of a great multitude is
kindled over you, and they shall take away certain of you, and feed
you, being idle, with things offered unto idols.

   {16:69} And they that consent unto them shall be had in derision and
in reproach, and trodden under foot.

   {16:70} For there shall be in every place, and in the next cities, a
great insurrection upon those that fear the Lord.

   {16:71} They shall be like mad men, sparing none, but still spoiling
and destroying those that fear the Lord.

   {16:72} For they shall waste and take away their goods, and cast
them out of their houses.

   {16:73} Then shall they be known, who are my chosen; and they shall
be tried as the gold in the fire.

   {16:74} Hear, O ye my beloved, saith the Lord: behold, the days of
trouble are at hand, but I will deliver you from the same.

   {16:75} Be ye not afraid neither doubt; for God is your guide,

   {16:76} And the guide of them who keep my commandments and precepts,
saith the Lord God: let not your sins weigh you down, and let not your
iniquities lift up themselves.

   {16:77} Woe be unto them that are bound with their sins, and covered
with their iniquities like as a field is covered over with bushes, and
the path thereof covered with thorns, that no man may travel through!

   {16:78} It is left undressed, and is cast into the fire to be
consumed therewith.




