
The Gospel According to St. John

   {1:1} In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. {1:2} The same was in the beginning with God. {1:3}
All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made
that was made. {1:4} In him was life; and the life was the light of
men. {1:5} And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness
comprehended it not.

   {1:6} There was a man sent from God, whose name [was] John. {1:7}
The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all
[men] through him might believe. {1:8} He was not that Light, but [was
sent] to bear witness of that Light. {1:9} [That] was the true Light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. {1:10} He was in
the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.
{1:11} He came unto his own, and his own received him not. {1:12} But
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, [even] to them that believe on his name: {1:13} Which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God. {1:14} And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,)
full of grace and truth.

   {1:15} John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of
whom I spake, He that cometh after me is preferred before me: for he
was before me. {1:16} And of his fulness have all we received, and
grace for grace. {1:17} For the law was given by Moses, [but] grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ. {1:18} No man hath seen God at any time;
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath
declared [him.]

   {1:19} And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests
and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? {1:20} And he
confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ. {1:21}
And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not.
Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. {1:22} Then said they unto
him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us.
What sayest thou of thyself? {1:23} He said, I [am] the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said
the prophet Esaias. {1:24} And they which were sent were of the
Pharisees. {1:25} And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest
thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet?
{1:26} John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but there
standeth one among you, whom ye know not; {1:27} He it is, who coming
after me is preferred before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy
to unloose. {1:28} These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan,
where John was baptizing.

   {1:29} The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith,
Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. {1:30}
This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is preferred
before me: for he was before me. {1:31} And I knew him not: but that he
should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with
water. {1:32} And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending
from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. {1:33} And I knew him
not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. {1:34} And I saw,
and bare record that this is the Son of God.

   {1:35} Again the next day after John stood, and two of his
disciples; {1:36} And looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold
the Lamb of God! {1:37} And the two disciples heard him speak, and they
followed Jesus. {1:38} Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and
saith unto them, What seek ye? They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to
say, being interpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou? {1:39} He saith
unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode
with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour. {1:40} One of the
two which heard John [speak,] and followed him, was Andrew, Simon
Peter's brother. {1:41} He first findeth his own brother Simon, and
saith unto him, We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted,
the Christ. {1:42} And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld
him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be called
Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone.

   {1:43} The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and
findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me. {1:44} Now Philip was of
Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. {1:45} Philip findeth
Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the
law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
{1:46} And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out
of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. {1:47} Jesus saw
Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no guile! {1:48} Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest
thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called
thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. {1:49} Nathanael
answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art
the King of Israel. {1:50} Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I
said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou
shalt see greater things than these. {1:51} And he saith unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and
the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

   {2:1} And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and
the mother of Jesus was there: {2:2} And both Jesus was called, and his
disciples, to the marriage. {2:3} And when they wanted wine, the mother
of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine. {2:4} Jesus saith unto her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come. {2:5}
His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do
[it. ]{2:6} And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the
manner of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins
apiece. {2:7} Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And
they filled them up to the brim. {2:8} And he saith unto them, Draw out
now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare [it. ]{2:9}
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the water
knew;) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, {2:10} And
saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine;
and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: [but] thou hast
kept the good wine until now. {2:11} This beginning of miracles did
Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his
disciples believed on him.

   {2:12} After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and
his brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days.

   {2:13} And the Jews' passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem, {2:14} And found in the temple those that sold oxen and
sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting: {2:15} And when he
had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple,
and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers' money, and
overthrew the tables; {2:16} And said unto them that sold doves, Take
these things hence; make not my Father's house an house of merchandise.
{2:17} And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of
thine house hath eaten me up.

   {2:18} Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest
thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things? {2:19} Jesus
answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I
will raise it up. {2:20} Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was
this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days? {2:21}
But he spake of the temple of his body. {2:22} When therefore he was
risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this
unto them; and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus
had said.

   {2:23} Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast
[day,] many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he
did. {2:24} But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew
all [men, ]{2:25} And needed not that any should testify of man: for he
knew what was in man.

   {3:1} There was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of
the Jews: {3:2} The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him,
Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do
these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him. {3:3} Jesus
answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. {3:4} Nicodemus
saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the
second time into his mother's womb, and be born? {3:5} Jesus answered,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and [of]
the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. {3:6} That which
is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit. {3:7} Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born again.
{3:8} The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so
is every one that is born of the Spirit. {3:9} Nicodemus answered and
said unto him, How can these things be? {3:10} Jesus answered and said
unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?
{3:11} Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and
testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness. {3:12} If I
have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe,
if I tell you [of] heavenly things? {3:13} And no man hath ascended up
to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, [even] the Son of man
which is in heaven.

   {3:14} And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so
must the Son of man be lifted up: {3:15} That whosoever believeth in
him should not perish, but have eternal life.

   {3:16} For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. {3:17} For God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved.

   {3:18} He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that
believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God. {3:19} And this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. {3:20} For every one
that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his
deeds should be reproved. {3:21} But he that doeth truth cometh to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in
God.

   {3:22} After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land
of Judaea; and there he tarried with them, and baptized.

   {3:23} And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because
there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized. {3:24}
For John was not yet cast into prison.

   {3:25} Then there arose a question between [some] of John's
disciples and the Jews about purifying. {3:26} And they came unto John,
and said unto him, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom
thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all [men] come to
him. {3:27} John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except
it be given him from heaven. {3:28} Ye yourselves bear me witness, that
I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. {3:29} He
that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because
of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled. {3:30}
He must increase, but I [must] decrease. {3:31} He that cometh from
above is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of
the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above all. {3:32} And what he
hath seen and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his
testimony. {3:33} He that hath received his testimony hath set to his
seal that God is true. {3:34} For he whom God hath sent speaketh the
words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure [unto him.
]{3:35} The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his
hand. {3:36} He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he
that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God
abideth on him.

   {4:1} When therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, {4:2} (Though Jesus
himself baptized not, but his disciples,) {4:3} He left Judaea, and
departed again into Galilee. {4:4} And he must needs go through
Samaria. {4:5} Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called
Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
{4:6} Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with
[his] journey, sat thus on the well: [and] it was about the sixth hour.
{4:7} There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto
her, Give me to drink. {4:8} (For his disciples were gone away unto the
city to buy meat.) {4:9} Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How
is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of
Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. {4:10}
Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and
who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. {4:11} The
woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well
is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water? {4:12} Art thou
greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank
thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle? {4:13} Jesus
answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall
thirst again: {4:14} But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall
give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall
be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. {4:15}
The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw. {4:16} Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy
husband, and come hither. {4:17} The woman answered and said, I have no
husband. Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband:
{4:18} For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is
not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly. {4:19} The woman saith unto
him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. {4:20} Our fathers
worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship. {4:21} Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe
me, the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem, worship the Father. {4:22} Ye worship ye know not what: we
know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews. {4:23} But the hour
cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father
in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him.
{4:24} God [is] a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship [him]
in spirit and in truth. {4:25} The woman saith unto him, I know that
Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell
us all things. {4:26} Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am
[he.]

   {4:27} And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he
talked with the woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why
talkest thou with her? {4:28} The woman then left her waterpot, and
went her way into the city, and saith to the men, {4:29} Come, see a
man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?
{4:30} Then they went out of the city, and came unto him.

   {4:31} In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master,
eat. {4:32} But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not
of. {4:33} Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man
brought him [ought] to eat? {4:34} Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. {4:35} Say not
ye, There are yet four months, and [then] cometh harvest? behold, I say
unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white
already to harvest. {4:36} And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and
gathereth fruit unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that
reapeth may rejoice together. {4:37} And herein is that saying true,
One soweth, and another reapeth. {4:38} I sent you to reap that whereon
ye bestowed no labour: other men laboured, and ye are entered into
their labours.

   {4:39} And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for
the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I
did. {4:40} So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought
him that he would tarry with them: and he abode there two days. {4:41}
And many more believed because of his own word; {4:42} And said unto
the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard
[him] ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Saviour
of the world.

   {4:43} Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee.
{4:44} For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in
his own country. {4:45} Then when he was come into Galilee, the
Galilaeans received him, having seen all the things that he did at
Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast. {4:46} So
Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine.
And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum.
{4:47} When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judaea into Galilee, he
went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his
son: for he was at the point of death. {4:48} Then said Jesus unto him,
Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. {4:49} The
nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die. {4:50} Jesus
saith unto him, Go thy way; thy son liveth. And the man believed the
word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. {4:51} And as
he was now going down, his servants met him, and told [him,] saying,
Thy son liveth. {4:52} Then enquired he of them the hour when he began
to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the
fever left him. {4:53} So the father knew that [it was] at the same
hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and himself
believed, and his whole house. {4:54} This [is] again the second
miracle [that] Jesus did, when he was come out of Judaea into Galilee.

   {5:1} After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to
Jerusalem. {5:2} Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep [market] a
pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five
porches. {5:3} In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of
blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. {5:4} For
an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled the
water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. {5:5} And a certain man
was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. {5:6} When
Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time [in that
case,] he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? {5:7} The impotent
man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to
put me into the pool: but while I am coming, another steppeth down
before me. {5:8} Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.
{5:9} And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and
walked: and on the same day was the sabbath.

   {5:10} The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the
sabbath day: it is not lawful for thee to carry [thy] bed. {5:11} He
answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up
thy bed, and walk. {5:12} Then asked they him, What man is that which
said unto thee, Take up thy bed, and walk? {5:13} And he that was
healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a
multitude being in [that] place. {5:14} Afterward Jesus findeth him in
the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. {5:15} The man departed, and
told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made him whole. {5:16} And
therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because
he had done these things on the sabbath day.

   {5:17} But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work. {5:18} Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he
not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father,
making himself equal with God. {5:19} Then answered Jesus and said unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he
doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. {5:20} For the Father loveth
the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth: and he will
shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel. {5:21} For as
the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth [them;] even so the Son
quickeneth whom he will. {5:22} For the Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son: {5:23} That all [men] should
honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not
the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. {5:24} Verily,
verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him
that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. {5:25} Verily,
verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.
{5:26} For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the
Son to have life in himself; {5:27} And hath given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. {5:28} Marvel not
at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice, {5:29} And shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. {5:30} I can of mine own self
do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek
not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.
{5:31} If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true.

   {5:32} There is another that beareth witness of me; and I know that
the witness which he witnesseth of me is true. {5:33} Ye sent unto
John, and he bare witness unto the truth. {5:34} But I receive not
testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved.
{5:35} He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a
season to rejoice in his light.

   {5:36} But I have greater witness than [that] of John: for the works
which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me. {5:37} And the Father
himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye have neither
heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. {5:38} And ye have not
his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not.

   {5:39} Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal
life: and they are they which testify of me. {5:40} And ye will not
come to me, that ye might have life. {5:41} I receive not honour from
men. {5:42} But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.
{5:43} I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. {5:44} How can ye
believe, which receive honour one of another, and seek not the honour
that [cometh] from God only? {5:45} Do not think that I will accuse you
to the Father: there is [one] that accuseth you, [even] Moses, in whom
ye trust. {5:46} For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me:
for he wrote of me. {5:47} But if ye believe not his writings, how
shall ye believe my words?

   {6:1} After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which
is [the sea] of Tiberias. {6:2} And a great multitude followed him,
because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased.
{6:3} And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples. {6:4} And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh.

   {6:5} When Jesus then lifted up [his] eyes, and saw a great company
come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread, that
these may eat? {6:6} And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew
what he would do. {6:7} Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth of
bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a
little. {6:8} One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother,
saith unto him, {6:9} There is a lad here, which hath five barley
loaves, and two small fishes: but what are they among so many? {6:10}
And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the
place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. {6:11} And
Jesus took the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he distributed to
the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down; and
likewise of the fishes as much as they would. {6:12} When they were
filled, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that
remain, that nothing be lost. {6:13} Therefore they gathered [them]
together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five
barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had eaten.
{6:14} Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did,
said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.

   {6:15} When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take
him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain
himself alone. {6:16} And when even was [now] come, his disciples went
down unto the sea, {6:17} And entered into a ship, and went over the
sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to
them. {6:18} And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.
{6:19} So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs,
they see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship: and
they were afraid. {6:20} But he saith unto them, It is I; be not
afraid. {6:21} Then they willingly received him into the ship: and
immediately the ship was at the land whither they went.

   {6:22} The day following, when the people which stood on the other
side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one
whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his
disciples into the boat, but [that] his disciples were gone away alone;
{6:23} (Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the
place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks:)
{6:24} When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither
his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking
for Jesus. {6:25} And when they had found him on the other side of the
sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? {6:26} Jesus
answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not
because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and
were filled. {6:27} Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for
that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man
shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed. {6:28} Then
said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of
God? {6:29} Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God,
that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. {6:30} They said therefore
unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe
thee? what dost thou work? {6:31} Our fathers did eat manna in the
desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. {6:32}
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave
you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread
from heaven. {6:33} For the bread of God is he which cometh down from
heaven, and giveth life unto the world. {6:34} Then said they unto him,
Lord, evermore give us this bread. {6:35} And Jesus said unto them, I
am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he
that believeth on me shall never thirst. {6:36} But I said unto you,
That ye also have seen me, and believe not. {6:37} All that the Father
giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise
cast out. {6:38} For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. {6:39} And this is the Father's will
which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. {6:40} And this
is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son,
and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him
up at the last day. {6:41} The Jews then murmured at him, because he
said, I am the bread which came down from heaven. {6:42} And they said,
Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?
how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? {6:43} Jesus
therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves.
{6:44} No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw
him: and I will raise him up at the last day. {6:45} It is written in
the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore
that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. {6:46}
Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath
seen the Father. {6:47} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that
believeth on me hath everlasting life. {6:48} I am that bread of life.
{6:49} Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.
{6:50} This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may
eat thereof, and not die. {6:51} I am the living bread which came down
from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and
the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life
of the world. {6:52} The Jews therefore strove among themselves,
saying, How can this man give us [his] flesh to eat? {6:53} Then Jesus
said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. {6:54}
Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I
will raise him up at the last day. {6:55} For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed. {6:56} He that eateth my flesh, and
drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. {6:57} As the living
Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me,
even he shall live by me. {6:58} This is that bread which came down
from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that
eateth of this bread shall live for ever. {6:59} These things said he
in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. {6:60} Many therefore of
his disciples, when they had heard [this,] said, This is an hard
saying; who can hear it? {6:61} When Jesus knew in himself that his
disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you?
{6:62} [What] and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before? {6:63} It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
nothing: the words that I speak unto you, [they] are spirit, and [they]
are life. {6:64} But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus
knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and who should
betray him. {6:65} And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man
can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father.

   {6:66} From that [time] many of his disciples went back, and walked
no more with him. {6:67} Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also
go away? {6:68} Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we
go? thou hast the words of eternal life. {6:69} And we believe and are
sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. {6:70} Jesus
answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?
{6:71} He spake of Judas Iscariot [the son] of Simon: for he it was
that should betray him, being one of the twelve.

   {7:1} After these things Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not
walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill him. {7:2} Now the Jews'
feast of tabernacles was at hand. {7:3} His brethren therefore said
unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may
see the works that thou doest. {7:4} For [there is] no man [that] doeth
any thing in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou
do these things, shew thyself to the world. {7:5} For neither did his
brethren believe in him. {7:6} Then Jesus said unto them, My time is
not yet come: but your time is alway ready. {7:7} The world cannot hate
you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof
are evil. {7:8} Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this
feast; for my time is not yet full come. {7:9} When he had said these
words unto them, he abode [still] in Galilee.

   {7:10} But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto
the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. {7:11} Then the Jews
sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he? {7:12} And there was
much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, He is a
good man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people. {7:13} Howbeit
no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews.

   {7:14} Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the
temple, and taught. {7:15} And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth
this man letters, having never learned? {7:16} Jesus answered them, and
said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. {7:17} If any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God,
or [whether] I speak of myself. {7:18} He that speaketh of himself
seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the
same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. {7:19} Did not Moses
give you the law, and [yet] none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye
about to kill me? {7:20} The people answered and said, Thou hast a
devil: who goeth about to kill thee? {7:21} Jesus answered and said
unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. {7:22} Moses
therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but
of the fathers;) and ye on the sabbath day circumcise a man. {7:23} If
a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man
every whit whole on the sabbath day? {7:24} Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. {7:25} Then said some of them
of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they seek to kill? {7:26} But, lo,
he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know
indeed that this is the very Christ? {7:27} Howbeit we know this man
whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is.
{7:28} Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both
know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of myself, but he
that sent me is true, whom ye know not. {7:29} But I know him: for I am
from him, and he hath sent me. {7:30} Then they sought to take him: but
no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. {7:31} And
many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, will
he do more miracles than these which this [man] hath done?

   {7:32} The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things
concerning him; and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers
to take him. {7:33} Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I
with you, and [then] I go unto him that sent me. {7:34} Ye shall seek
me, and shall not find [me:] and where I am, [thither] ye cannot come.
{7:35} Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go, that we
shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles,
and teach the Gentiles? {7:36} What [manner of] saying is this that he
said, Ye shall seek me, and shall not find [me:] and where I am,
[thither] ye cannot come? {7:37} In the last day, that great [day] of
the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him
come unto me, and drink. {7:38} He that believeth on me, as the
scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water. {7:39} (But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe
on him should receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet [given;] because
that Jesus was not yet glorified.)

   {7:40} Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying,
said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. {7:41} Others said, This is the
Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? {7:42} Hath
not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the seed of David, and
out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? {7:43} So there was a
division among the people because of him. {7:44} And some of them would
have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.

   {7:45} Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees;
and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? {7:46} The
officers answered, Never man spake like this man. {7:47} Then answered
them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? {7:48} Have any of the rulers
or of the Pharisees believed on him? {7:49} But this people who knoweth
not the law are cursed. {7:50} Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came
to Jesus by night, being one of them,) {7:51} Doth our law judge [any]
man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth? {7:52} They answered
and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look: for out
of Galilee ariseth no prophet. {7:53} And every man went unto his own
house.

   {8:1} Jesus went unto the mount of Olives. {8:2} And early in the
morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto
him; and he sat down, and taught them. {8:3} And the scribes and
Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and when they had
set her in the midst, {8:4} They say unto him, Master, this woman was
taken in adultery, in the very act. {8:5} Now Moses in the law
commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou? {8:6}
This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But
Jesus stooped down, and with [his] finger wrote on the ground, [as
though he heard them not. ]{8:7} So when they continued asking him, he
lifted up himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among
you, let him first cast a stone at her. {8:8} And again he stooped
down, and wrote on the ground. {8:9} And they which heard [it,] being
convicted by [their own] conscience, went out one by one, beginning at
the eldest, [even] unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the
woman standing in the midst. {8:10} When Jesus had lifted up himself,
and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those
thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee? {8:11} She said, No man,
Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin
no more.

   {8:12} Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of
the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life. {8:13} The Pharisees therefore said unto him,
Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true. {8:14} Jesus
answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, [yet] my
record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye
cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go. {8:15} Ye judge after the
flesh; I judge no man. {8:16} And yet if I judge, my judgment is true:
for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. {8:17} It is
also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. {8:18}
I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me
beareth witness of me. {8:19} Then said they unto him, Where is thy
Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had
known me, ye should have known my Father also. {8:20} These words spake
Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and no man laid
hands on him; for his hour was not yet come. {8:21} Then said Jesus
again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in
your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come. {8:22} Then said the Jews,
Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye cannot come.
{8:23} And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye
are of this world; I am not of this world. {8:24} I said therefore unto
you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am
[he,] ye shall die in your sins. {8:25} Then said they unto him, Who
art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even [the same] that I said unto
you from the beginning. {8:26} I have many things to say and to judge
of you: but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those
things which I have heard of him. {8:27} They understood not that he
spake to them of the Father. {8:28} Then said Jesus unto them, When ye
have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am [he,] and
[that] I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak
these things. {8:29} And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath
not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him. {8:30}
As he spake these words, many believed on him. {8:31} Then said Jesus
to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, [then]
are ye my disciples indeed; {8:32} And ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free.

   {8:33} They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free? {8:34}
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever
committeth sin is the servant of sin. {8:35} And the servant abideth
not in the house for ever: [but] the Son abideth ever. {8:36} If the
Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. {8:37} I
know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my
word hath no place in you. {8:38} I speak that which I have seen with
my Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father. {8:39}
They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith
unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of
Abraham. {8:40} But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you
the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. {8:41} Ye
do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of
fornication; we have one Father, [even] God. {8:42} Jesus said unto
them, If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth
and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. {8:43} Why
do ye not understand my speech? [even] because ye cannot hear my word.
{8:44} Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of [your] father
ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. {8:45} And
because I tell [you] the truth, ye believe me not. {8:46} Which of you
convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
{8:47} He that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear [them]
not, because ye are not of God. {8:48} Then answered the Jews, and said
unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil?
{8:49} Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and
ye do dishonour me. {8:50} And I seek not mine own glory: there is one
that seeketh and judgeth. {8:51} Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a
man keep my saying, he shall never see death. {8:52} Then said the Jews
unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the
prophets; and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall never
taste of death. {8:53} Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which
is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself? {8:54}
Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my
Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God: {8:55}
Yet ye have not known him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know
him not, I shall be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and keep his
saying. {8:56} Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw
[it,] and was glad. {8:57} Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not
yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? {8:58} Jesus said unto
them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. {8:59}
Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and
went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed
by.

   {9:1} And as [Jesus] passed by, he saw a man which was blind from
[his] birth. {9:2} And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did
sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? {9:3} Jesus
answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him. {9:4} I must work the
works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no
man can work. {9:5} As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the
world. {9:6} When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made
clay of the spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the
clay, {9:7} And said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, (which
is by interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and
came seeing.

   {9:8} The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him
that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? {9:9} Some
said, This is he: others [said,] He is like him: [but] he said, I am
[he. ]{9:10} Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened?
{9:11} He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay, and
anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and
wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight. {9:12} Then said
they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

   {9:13} They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind.
{9:14} And it was the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened
his eyes. {9:15} Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had
received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and
I washed, and do see. {9:16} Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This
man is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath day. Others said,
How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles? And there was a
division among them. {9:17} They say unto the blind man again, What
sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said, He is a
prophet. {9:18} But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he
had been blind, and received his sight, until they called the parents
of him that had received his sight. {9:19} And they asked them, saying,
Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now see?
{9:20} His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our
son, and that he was born blind: {9:21} But by what means he now seeth,
we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age;
ask him: he shall speak for himself. {9:22} These [words] spake his
parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already,
that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of
the synagogue. {9:23} Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask
him. {9:24} Then again called they the man that was blind, and said
unto him, Give God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner.
{9:25} He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner [or no,] I know
not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see. {9:26}
Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how opened he thine
eyes? {9:27} He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not
hear: wherefore would ye hear [it] again? will ye also be his
disciples? {9:28} Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his
disciple; but we are Moses' disciples. {9:29} We know that God spake
unto Moses: [as for] this [fellow,] we know not from whence he is.
{9:30} The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marvellous
thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and [yet] he hath opened
mine eyes. {9:31} Now we know that God heareth not sinners: but if any
man be a worshipper of God, and doeth his will, him he heareth. {9:32}
Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of
one that was born blind. {9:33} If this man were not of God, he could
do nothing. {9:34} They answered and said unto him, Thou wast
altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out.
{9:35} Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found
him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God? {9:36} He
answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? {9:37}
And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that
talketh with thee. {9:38} And he said, Lord, I believe. And he
worshipped him.

   {9:39} And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that
they which see not might see; and that they which see might be made
blind. {9:40} And [some] of the Pharisees which were with him heard
these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? {9:41} Jesus said
unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We
see; therefore your sin remaineth.

   {10:1} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the
door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a
thief and a robber. {10:2} But he that entereth in by the door is the
shepherd of the sheep. {10:3} To him the porter openeth; and the sheep
hear his voice: and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them
out. {10:4} And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before
them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. {10:5} And a
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know
not the voice of strangers. {10:6} This parable spake Jesus unto them:
but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them.
{10:7} Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
I am the door of the sheep. {10:8} All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear them. {10:9} I am the
door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and
out, and find pasture. {10:10} The thief cometh not, but for to steal,
and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have [it] more abundantly. {10:11} I am the good
shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. {10:12} But
he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are
not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the
wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. {10:13} The hireling
fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the sheep.
{10:14} I am the good shepherd, and know my [sheep,] and am known of
mine. {10:15} As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and
I lay down my life for the sheep. {10:16} And other sheep I have, which
are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice; and there shall be one fold, [and] one shepherd. {10:17}
Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again. {10:18} No man taketh it from me, but I lay it
down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again. This commandment have I received of my Father.

   {10:19} There was a division therefore again among the Jews for
these sayings. {10:20} And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is
mad; why hear ye him? {10:21} Others said, These are not the words of
him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?

   {10:22} And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it
was winter. {10:23} And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch.
{10:24} Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long
dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.
{10:25} Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works
that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me. {10:26} But ye
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.
{10:27} My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me:
{10:28} And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish,
neither shall any [man] pluck them out of my hand. {10:29} My Father,
which gave [them] me, is greater than all; and no [man] is able to
pluck [them] out of my Father's hand. {10:30} I and [my] Father are
one. {10:31} Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. {10:32}
Jesus answered them, Many good works have I shewed you from my Father;
for which of those works do ye stone me? {10:33} The Jews answered him,
saying, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy; and
because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. {10:34} Jesus
answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?
{10:35} If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the
scripture cannot be broken; {10:36} Say ye of him, whom the Father hath
sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said,
I am the Son of God? {10:37} If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not. {10:38} But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe
the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and
I in him. {10:39} Therefore they sought again to take him: but he
escaped out of their hand, {10:40} And went away again beyond Jordan
into the place where John at first baptized; and there he abode.
{10:41} And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but
all things that John spake of this man were true. {10:42} And many
believed on him there.

   {11:1} Now a certain [man] was sick, [named] Lazarus, of Bethany,
the town of Mary and her sister Martha. {11:2} (It was [that] Mary
which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her
hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.) {11:3} Therefore his sisters
sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.
{11:4} When Jesus heard [that,] he said, This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby. {11:5} Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
{11:6} When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days
still in the same place where he was. {11:7} Then after that saith he
to [his] disciples, Let us go into Judaea again. {11:8} [His] disciples
say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee; and goest
thou thither again? {11:9} Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours
in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he
seeth the light of this world. {11:10} But if a man walk in the night,
he stumbleth, because there is no light in him. {11:11} These things
said he: and after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus
sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep. {11:12} Then
said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. {11:13}
Howbeit Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken
of taking of rest in sleep. {11:14} Then said Jesus unto them plainly,
Lazarus is dead. {11:15} And I am glad for your sakes that I was not
there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.
{11:16} Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus, unto his
fellowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him. {11:17} Then
when Jesus came, he found that he had [lain] in the grave four days
already. {11:18} Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen
furlongs off: {11:19} And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to
comfort them concerning their brother. {11:20} Then Martha, as soon as
she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him: but Mary sat [still]
in the house. {11:21} Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died. {11:22} But I know, that even now,
whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give [it] thee. {11:23} Jesus
saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. {11:24} Martha saith unto
him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last
day. {11:25} Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life:
he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
{11:26} And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.
Believest thou this? {11:27} She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe
that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the
world. {11:28} And when she had so said, she went her way, and called
Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come, and calleth for
thee. {11:29} As soon as she heard [that,] she arose quickly, and came
unto him. {11:30} Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in
that place where Martha met him. {11:31} The Jews then which were with
her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose
up hastily and went out, followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave
to weep there. {11:32} Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw
him, she fell down at his feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died. {11:33} When Jesus therefore saw
her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which came with her, he groaned
in the spirit, and was troubled, {11:34} And said, Where have ye laid
him? They said unto him, Lord, come and see. {11:35} Jesus wept.
{11:36} Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him! {11:37} And some
of them said, Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind,
have caused that even this man should not have died? {11:38} Jesus
therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a cave,
and a stone lay upon it. {11:39} Jesus said, Take ye away the stone.
Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this
time he stinketh: for he hath been [dead] four days. {11:40} Jesus
saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe,
thou shouldest see the glory of God? {11:41} Then they took away the
stone [from the place] where the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up
[his] eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
{11:42} And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the
people which stand by I said [it,] that they may believe that thou hast
sent me. {11:43} And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud
voice, Lazarus, come forth. {11:44} And he that was dead came forth,
bound hand and foot with graveclothes: and his face was bound about
with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go.
{11:45} Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the
things which Jesus did, believed on him. {11:46} But some of them went
their ways to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done.

   {11:47} Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council,
and said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles. {11:48} If we
let him thus alone, all [men] will believe on him: and the Romans shall
come and take away both our place and nation. {11:49} And one of them,
[named] Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto them,
Ye know nothing at all, {11:50} Nor consider that it is expedient for
us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation
perish not. {11:51} And this spake he not of himself: but being high
priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation;
{11:52} And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather
together in one the children of God that were scattered abroad. {11:53}
Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put him to
death. {11:54} Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews;
but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city
called Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples.

   {11:55} And the Jews' passover was nigh at hand: and many went out
of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify
themselves. {11:56} Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among
themselves, as they stood in the temple, What think ye, that he will
not come to the feast? {11:57} Now both the chief priests and the
Pharisees had given a commandment, that, if any man knew where he were,
he should shew [it,] that they might take him.

   {12:1} Then Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany,
where Lazarus was which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
{12:2} There they made him a supper; and Martha served: but Lazarus was
one of them that sat at the table with him. {12:3} Then took Mary a
pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of
Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair: and the house was filled with
the odour of the ointment. {12:4} Then saith one of his disciples,
Judas Iscariot, Simon's [son,] which should betray him, {12:5} Why was
not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
{12:6} This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was
a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. {12:7} Then
said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept
this. {12:8} For the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not
always. {12:9} Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was
there: and they came not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see
Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.

   {12:10} But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus
also to death; {12:11} Because that by reason of him many of the Jews
went away, and believed on Jesus.

   {12:12} On the next day much people that were come to the feast,
when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, {12:13} Took
branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna:
Blessed [is] the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord.
{12:14} And Jesus, when he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is
written, {12:15} Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh,
sitting on an ass's colt. {12:16} These things understood not his
disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered
they that these things were written of him, and [that] they had done
these things unto him. {12:17} The people therefore that was with him
when he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead,
bare record. {12:18} For this cause the people also met him, for that
they heard that he had done this miracle. {12:19} The Pharisees
therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?
behold, the world is gone after him.

   {12:20} And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to
worship at the feast: {12:21} The same came therefore to Philip, which
was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see
Jesus. {12:22} Philip cometh and telleth Andrew: and again Andrew and
Philip tell Jesus.

   {12:23} And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the
Son of man should be glorified. {12:24} Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone:
but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit. {12:25} He that loveth his
life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall
keep it unto life eternal. {12:26} If any man serve me, let him follow
me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: if any man serve
me, him will [my] Father honour. {12:27} Now is my soul troubled; and
what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause
came I unto this hour. {12:28} Father, glorify thy name. Then came
there a voice from heaven, [saying,] I have both glorified [it,] and
will glorify [it] again. {12:29} The people therefore, that stood by,
and heard [it,] said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to
him. {12:30} Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of
me, but for your sakes. {12:31} Now is the judgment of this world: now
shall the prince of this world be cast out. {12:32} And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all [men] unto me. {12:33} This he
said, signifying what death he should die. {12:34} The people answered
him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever: and how
sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man?
{12:35} Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with
you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he
that walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. {12:36} While ye
have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light.
These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them.

   {12:37} But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet
they believed not on him: {12:38} That the saying of Esaias the prophet
might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report?
and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? {12:39} Therefore
they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, {12:40} He hath
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see
with [their] eyes, nor understand with [their] heart, and be converted,
and I should heal them. {12:41} These things said Esaias, when he saw
his glory, and spake of him.

   {12:42} Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on
him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess [him,] lest they
should be put out of the synagogue: {12:43} For they loved the praise
of men more than the praise of God.

   {12:44} Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not
on me, but on him that sent me. {12:45} And he that seeth me seeth him
that sent me. {12:46} I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth on me should not abide in darkness. {12:47} And if any man
hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to
judge the world, but to save the world. {12:48} He that rejecteth me,
and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. {12:49} For I
have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. {12:50} And I
know that his commandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak
therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.

   {13:1} Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that
his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the
Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them
unto the end. {13:2} And supper being ended, the devil having now put
into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's [son,] to betray him; {13:3}
Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and
that he was come from God, and went to God; {13:4} He riseth from
supper, and laid aside his garments; and took a towel, and girded
himself. {13:5} After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to
wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe [them] with the towel wherewith
he was girded. {13:6} Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith
unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my feet? {13:7} Jesus answered and said
unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know
hereafter. {13:8} Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my feet.
Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me.
{13:9} Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also
[my] hands and [my] head. {13:10} Jesus saith to him, He that is washed
needeth not save to wash [his] feet, but is clean every whit: and ye
are clean, but not all. {13:11} For he knew who should betray him;
therefore said he, Ye are not all clean. {13:12} So after he had washed
their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said
unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? {13:13} Ye call me Master
and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. {13:14} If I then, [your] Lord
and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's
feet. {13:15} For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done to you. {13:16} Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant
is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he
that sent him. {13:17} If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them.

   {13:18} I speak not of you all: I know whom I have chosen: but that
the scripture may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath
lifted up his heel against me. {13:19} Now I tell you before it come,
that, when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am [he. ]{13:20}
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send
receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
{13:21} When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and
testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray me. {13:22} Then the disciples looked one on another,
doubting of whom he spake. {13:23} Now there was leaning on Jesus'
bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved. {13:24} Simon Peter
therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom
he spake. {13:25} He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord,
who is it? {13:26} Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shall give a
sop, when I have dipped [it.] And when he had dipped the sop, he gave
[it] to Judas Iscariot, [the son] of Simon. {13:27} And after the sop
Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do
quickly. {13:28} Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake
this unto him. {13:29} For some [of them] thought, because Judas had
the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy [those things] that we have
need of against the feast; or, that he should give something to the
poor. {13:30} He then having received the sop went immediately out: and
it was night.

   {13:31} Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son
of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. {13:32} If God be
glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall
straightway glorify him. {13:33} Little children, yet a little while I
am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I
go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you. {13:34} A new commandment I
give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye
also love one another. {13:35} By this shall all [men] know that ye are
my disciples, if ye have love one to another.

   {13:36} Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus
answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not follow me now; but thou
shalt follow me afterwards. {13:37} Peter said unto him, Lord, why
cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thy sake. {13:38}
Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied
me thrice.

   {14:1} Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe
also in me. {14:2} In my Father's house are many mansions: if [it were]
not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. {14:3}
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto myself; that where I am, [there] ye may be also. {14:4} And
whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. {14:5} Thomas saith unto
him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way?
{14:6} Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no
man cometh unto the Father, but by me. {14:7} If ye had known me, ye
should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and
have seen him. {14:8} Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father,
and it sufficeth us. {14:9} Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so long
time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath
seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou [then,] Shew us the
Father? {14:10} Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself:
but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. {14:11} Believe
me that I [am] in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me
for the very works' sake. {14:12} Verily, verily, I say unto you, He
that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater
[works] than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father. {14:13}
And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in the Son. {14:14} If ye shall ask any thing in my
name, I will do [it.]

   {14:15} If ye love me, keep my commandments. {14:16} And I will pray
the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever; {14:17} [Even] the Spirit of truth; whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye
know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. {14:18} I will
not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. {14:19} Yet a little
while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me: because I live,
ye shall live also. {14:20} At that day ye shall know that I [am] in my
Father, and ye in me, and I in you. {14:21} He that hath my
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that
loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest myself to him. {14:22} Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot,
Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto
the world? {14:23} Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me,
he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him. {14:24} He that loveth me not
keepeth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the
Father's which sent me. {14:25} These things have I spoken unto you,
being [yet] present with you. {14:26} But the Comforter, [which is] the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
said unto you. {14:27} Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid. {14:28} Ye have heard how I said
unto you, I go away, and come [again] unto you. If ye loved me, ye
would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is
greater than I. {14:29} And now I have told you before it come to pass,
that, when it is come to pass, ye might believe. {14:30} Hereafter I
will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world cometh, and
hath nothing in me. {14:31} But that the world may know that I love the
Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. Arise, let
us go hence.

   {15:1} I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. {15:2}
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every
[branch] that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth
more fruit. {15:3} Now ye are clean through the word which I have
spoken unto you. {15:4} Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. {15:5} I am the vine, ye [are] the branches: He
that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit:
for without me ye can do nothing. {15:6} If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and
cast [them] into the fire, and they are burned. {15:7} If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall
be done unto you. {15:8} Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear
much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples. {15:9} As the Father hath
loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. {15:10} If ye
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my
Father's commandments, and abide in his love. {15:11} These things have
I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and [that] your joy
might be full. {15:12} This is my commandment, That ye love one
another, as I have loved you. {15:13} Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. {15:14} Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. {15:15} Henceforth I call
you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but
I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made known unto you. {15:16} Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth
fruit, and [that] your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall
ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you. {15:17} These things
I command you, that ye love one another. {15:18} If the world hate you,
ye know that [it hated] me before it hated you. {15:19} If ye were of
the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hateth you. {15:20} Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant
is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will
also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they will keep yours
also. {15:21} But all these things will they do unto you for my name's
sake, because they know not him that sent me. {15:22} If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloke
for their sin. {15:23} He that hateth me hateth my Father also. {15:24}
If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they
had not had sin: but now have they both seen and hated both me and my
Father. {15:25} But [this cometh to pass,] that the word might be
fulfilled that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause.
{15:26} But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from
the Father, [even] the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the
Father, he shall testify of me: {15:27} And ye also shall bear witness,
because ye have been with me from the beginning.

   {16:1} These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended. {16:2} They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the
time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God
service. {16:3} And these things will they do unto you, because they
have not known the Father, nor me. {16:4} But these things have I told
you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you of
them. And these things I said not unto you at the beginning, because I
was with you. {16:5} But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none
of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? {16:6} But because I have said
these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. {16:7}
Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go
away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but
if I depart, I will send him unto you. {16:8} And when he is come, he
will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:
{16:9} Of sin, because they believe not on me; {16:10} Of
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;
{16:11} Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.
{16:12} I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now. {16:13} Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will
guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but
whatsoever he shall hear, [that] shall he speak: and he will shew you
things to come. {16:14} He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of
mine, and shall shew [it] unto you. {16:15} All things that the Father
hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall
shew [it] unto you. {16:16} A little while, and ye shall not see me:
and again, a little while, and ye shall see me, because I go to the
Father. {16:17} Then said [some] of his disciples among themselves,
What is this that he saith unto us, A little while, and ye shall not
see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me: and, Because I
go to the Father? {16:18} They said therefore, What is this that he
saith, A little while? we cannot tell what he saith. {16:19} Now Jesus
knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye
enquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall
not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me? {16:20}
Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall
be turned into joy. {16:21} A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow,
because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child,
she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into
the world. {16:22} And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you
again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from
you. {16:23} And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give [it] you. {16:24} Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask,
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. {16:25} These things
have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shall
no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you plainly of the
Father. {16:26} At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto
you, that I will pray the Father for you: {16:27} For the Father
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God. {16:28} I came forth from the Father, and am come
into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. {16:29}
His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and
speakest no proverb. {16:30} Now are we sure that thou knowest all
things, and needest not that any man should ask thee: by this we
believe that thou camest forth from God. {16:31} Jesus answered them,
Do ye now believe? {16:32} Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come,
that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me
alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. {16:33}
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.

   {17:1} These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven,
and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also
may glorify thee: {17:2} As thou hast given him power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.
{17:3} And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. {17:4} I have
glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest
me to do. {17:5} And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. {17:6} I
have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy
word. {17:7} Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast
given me are of thee. {17:8} For I have given unto them the words which
thou gavest me; and they have received [them,] and have known surely
that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send
me. {17:9} I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou hast given me; for they are thine. {17:10} And all mine are
thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. {17:11} And now
I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to
thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast
given me, that they may be one, as we [are. ]{17:12} While I was with
them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I
have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the
scripture might be fulfilled. {17:13} And now come I to thee; and these
things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in
themselves. {17:14} I have given them thy word; and the world hath
hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
world. {17:15} I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the
world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. {17:16} They
are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. {17:17} Sanctify
them through thy truth: thy word is truth. {17:18} As thou hast sent me
into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. {17:19}
And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth. {17:20} Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; {17:21}
That they all may be one; as thou, Father, [art] in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou
hast sent me. {17:22} And the glory which thou gavest me I have given
them; that they may be one, even as we are one: {17:23} I in them, and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world
may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast
loved me. {17:24} Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given
me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou
hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world.
{17:25} O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have
known thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. {17:26} And I
have declared unto them thy name, and will declare [it:] that the love
wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

   {18:1} When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his
disciples over the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he
entered, and his disciples. {18:2} And Judas also, which betrayed him,
knew the place: for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with his disciples.
{18:3} Judas then, having received a band [of men] and officers from
the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and
torches and weapons. {18:4} Jesus therefore, knowing all things that
should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye?
{18:5} They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I
am [he.] And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them. {18:6} As
soon then as he had said unto them, I am [he,] they went backward, and
fell to the ground. {18:7} Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And
they said, Jesus of Nazareth. {18:8} Jesus answered, I have told you
that I am [he:] if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way: {18:9}
That the saying might be fulfilled, which he spake, Of them which thou
gavest me have I lost none. {18:10} Then Simon Peter having a sword
drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right
ear. The servant's name was Malchus. {18:11} Then said Jesus unto
Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath
given me, shall I not drink it? {18:12} Then the band and the captain
and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and bound him, {18:13} And led him
away to Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was
the high priest that same year. {18:14} Now Caiaphas was he, which gave
counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for
the people.

   {18:15} And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and [so did] another
disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in
with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. {18:16} But Peter stood
at the door without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known
unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the door, and
brought in Peter. {18:17} Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto
Peter, Art not thou also [one] of this man's disciples? He saith, I am
not. {18:18} And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a
fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter
stood with them, and warmed himself.

   {18:19} The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of
his doctrine. {18:20} Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world;
I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews
always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. {18:21} Why askest
thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold,
they know what I said. {18:22} And when he had thus spoken, one of the
officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest so? {18:23} Jesus answered him, If I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest
thou me? {18:24} Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high
priest. {18:25} And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said
therefore unto him, Art not thou also [one] of his disciples? He denied
[it,] and said, I am not. {18:26} One of the servants of the high
priest, being [his] kinsman whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I
see thee in the garden with him? {18:27} Peter then denied again: and
immediately the cock crew.

   {18:28} Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment:
and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment hall,
lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the passover.
{18:29} Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring
ye against this man? {18:30} They answered and said unto him, If he
were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.
{18:31} Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him
according to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not
lawful for us to put any man to death: {18:32} That the saying of Jesus
might be fulfilled, which he spake, signifying what death he should
die. {18:33} Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and
called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? {18:34}
Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others
tell it thee of me? {18:35} Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own
nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me: what hast
thou done? {18:36} Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if
my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from
hence. {18:37} Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then?
Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born,
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.
{18:38} Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said
this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in
him no fault [at all. ]{18:39} But ye have a custom, that I should
release unto you one at the passover: will ye therefore that I release
unto you the King of the Jews? {18:40} Then cried they all again,
saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

   {19:1} Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged [him. ]{19:2}
And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put [it] on his head,
and they put on him a purple robe, {19:3} And said, Hail, King of the
Jews! and they smote him with their hands. {19:4} Pilate therefore went
forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you,
that ye may know that I find no fault in him. {19:5} Then came Jesus
forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And [Pilate]
saith unto them, Behold the man! {19:6} When the chief priests
therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify [him,]
crucify [him.] Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify [him:]
for I find no fault in him. {19:7} The Jews answered him, We have a
law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God.

   {19:8} When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more
afraid; {19:9} And went again into the judgment hall, and saith unto
Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. {19:10} Then
saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that
I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? {19:11}
Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power [at all] against me, except
it were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee
hath the greater sin. {19:12} And from thenceforth Pilate sought to
release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go,
thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh
against Caesar.

   {19:13} When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus
forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is called the
Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. {19:14} And it was the
preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith
unto the Jews, Behold your King! {19:15} But they cried out, Away with
[him,] away with [him,] crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I
crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but
Caesar. {19:16} Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be
crucified. And they took Jesus, and led [him] away. {19:17} And he
bearing his cross went forth into a place called [the place] of a
skull, which is called in the Hebrew Golgotha: {19:18} Where they
crucified him, and two others with him, on either side one, and Jesus
in the midst.

   {19:19} And Pilate wrote a title, and put [it] on the cross. And the
writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. {19:20} This title
then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was
nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, [and] Greek, [and]
Latin. {19:21} Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write
not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews.
{19:22} Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.

   {19:23} Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also [his]
coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
{19:24} They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but
cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that the scripture might be
fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my
vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.

   {19:25} Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the [wife] of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
{19:26} When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing
by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son!
{19:27} Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that
hour that disciple took her unto his own [home.]

   {19:28} After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.
{19:29} Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and they filled a
spunge with vinegar, and put [it] upon hyssop, and put [it] to his
mouth. {19:30} When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said,
It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. {19:31}
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies
should not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day, (for that sabbath
day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken,
and [that] they might be taken away. {19:32} Then came the soldiers,
and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified
with him. {19:33} But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead
already, they brake not his legs: {19:34} But one of the soldiers with
a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water.
{19:35} And he that saw [it] bare record, and his record is true: and
he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe. {19:36} For these
things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him
shall not be broken. {19:37} And again another scripture saith, They
shall look on him whom they pierced.

   {19:38} And after this Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of
Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might
take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave [him] leave. He came
therefore, and took the body of Jesus. {19:39} And there came also
Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound [weight. ]{19:40}
Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with
the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. {19:41} Now in the
place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a
new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. {19:42} There laid they
Jesus therefore because of the Jews' preparation [day;] for the
sepulchre was nigh at hand.

   {20:1} The first [day] of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when
it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away
from the sepulchre. {20:2} Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter,
and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They
have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where
they have laid him. {20:3} Peter therefore went forth, and that other
disciple, and came to the sepulchre. {20:4} So they ran both together:
and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the
sepulchre. {20:5} And he stooping down, [and looking in,] saw the linen
clothes lying; yet went he not in. {20:6} Then cometh Simon Peter
following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes
lie, {20:7} And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the
linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself. {20:8} Then
went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre,
and he saw, and believed. {20:9} For as yet they knew not the
scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. {20:10} Then the
disciples went away again unto their own home.

   {20:11} But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she
wept, she stooped down, [and looked] into the sepulchre, {20:12} And
seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the other
at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. {20:13} And they say
unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because they
have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
{20:14} And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw
Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. {20:15} Jesus saith
unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? She, supposing
him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him
hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
{20:16} Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto
him, Rabboni; which is to say, Master. {20:17} Jesus saith unto her,
Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father;
and [to] my God, and your God. {20:18} Mary Magdalene came and told the
disciples that she had seen the Lord, and [that] he had spoken these
things unto her.

   {20:19} Then the same day at evening, being the first [day] of the
week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for
fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto
them, Peace [be] unto you. {20:20} And when he had so said, he shewed
unto them [his] hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when
they saw the Lord. {20:21} Then said Jesus to them again, Peace [be]
unto you: as [my] Father hath sent me, even so send I you. {20:22} And
when he had said this, he breathed on [them,] and saith unto them,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost: {20:23} Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; [and] whose soever [sins] ye retain, they are
retained.

   {20:24} But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with
them when Jesus came. {20:25} The other disciples therefore said unto
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see
in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print
of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

   {20:26} And after eight days again his disciples were within, and
Thomas with them: [then] came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in
the midst, and said, Peace [be] unto you. {20:27} Then saith he to
Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither
thy hand, and thrust [it] into my side: and be not faithless, but
believing. {20:28} And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and
my God. {20:29} Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen
me, thou hast believed: blessed [are] they that have not seen, and
[yet] have believed.

   {20:30} And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book: {20:31} But these are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God; and that believing ye might have life through his name.

   {21:1} After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the
disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he [himself.
]{21:2} There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and
Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the [sons] of Zebedee, and two other
of his disciples. {21:3} Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing.
They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered
into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing. {21:4} But
when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the
disciples knew not that it was Jesus. {21:5} Then Jesus saith unto
them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No. {21:6} And he
said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye
shall find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it
for the multitude of fishes. {21:7} Therefore that disciple whom Jesus
loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that
it was the Lord, he girt [his] fisher's coat [unto him,] (for he was
naked,) and did cast himself into the sea. {21:8} And the other
disciples came in a little ship; (for they were not far from land, but
as it were two hundred cubits,) dragging the net with fishes. {21:9} As
soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there,
and fish laid thereon, and bread. {21:10} Jesus saith unto them, Bring
of the fish which ye have now caught. {21:11} Simon Peter went up, and
drew the net to land full of great fishes, and hundred and fifty and
three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.
{21:12} Jesus saith unto them, Come [and] dine. And none of the
disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord.
{21:13} Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish
likewise. {21:14} This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself
to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.

   {21:15} So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon,
[son] of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea,
Lord; thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.
{21:16} He saith to him again the second time, Simon, [son] of Jonas,
lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love
thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep. {21:17} He saith unto him the
third time, Simon, [son] of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved
because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said
unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I love thee.
Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep. {21:18} Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither
thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry [thee] whither thou
wouldest not. {21:19} This spake he, signifying by what death he should
glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me.
{21:20} Then Peter, turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved
following; which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord,
which is he that betrayeth thee? {21:21} Peter seeing him saith to
Jesus, Lord, and what [shall] this man [do? ]{21:22} Jesus saith unto
him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what [is that] to thee?
follow thou me. {21:23} Then went this saying abroad among the
brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto
him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what
[is that] to thee? {21:24} This is the disciple which testifieth of
these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is
true. {21:25} And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the
which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the
world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.




